slow of Saile, we put on a compelled Valour. In the Grapple, I
Ham. A whole one I,
together with weake Hammes. All which Sir, though I
Be buried quicke with her, and so will I.
Oh what a Rogue and Pesant slaue am I?
Falne on the Inuentors head. All this can I
Hor. That can I,
Ham. Who I?
Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is I,
Ham. You cannot Sir take from me any thing, that I
The very faculty of Eyes and Eares. Yet I,
Hor. Infaith my Lord, not I
neuer Acted: or if it was, not aboue once, for the Play I
ago, and not forgotten yet? Then there's hope, a
Clo. A pestilence on him for a mad Rogue, a pour'd a
Ham. Oh wonderfull Sonne, that can so astonish a
Ham. It was a bruite part of him, to kill so Capitall a
Ham. I am glad of it: a knauish speech sleepes in a
Ham. Wee'l ha't to morrow night. You could for a
Other. The Gallowes maker; for that Frame outliues a
Ham. Let her not walke i'thSunne: Conception is a
What's Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba,
sleepes. Say on; come to Hecuba
For Hecuba?
Scena Secunda.
Scena Secunda.
That beetles o're his base into the Sea,
haue no more? ha?
Then may be giuen you. In few, Ophelia,
Exeunt. Ophelia
To the Celestiall, and my Soules Idoll, the most beautifed Ophelia.
Enter Laertes and Ophelia.
Ham. What, the faire Ophelia?
In hugger mugger to interre him. Poore Ophelia
Laer. Too much of water hast thou poore Ophelia,
Enter Ophelia.
Enter Ophelia.
Deere Maid, kinde Sister, sweet Ophelia:
Qu. Nay but Ophelia
Sprung from neglected loue. How now Ophelia?
Qu. How now Ophelia?
King. Pretty Ophelia
Scena Tertia
Actus Primus. Scoena Prima.
Helpe, helpe, hoa
Osr. Looke to the Queene there hoa
Ham. Am I not i'th' right old Iephta?
And fall a Cursing like a very Drab.
To sleepe, perchance to Dreame; I, there's the rub,
And therefore must his choyce be circumscrib'd
Lord Hamlet with his doublet all vnbrac'd,
Ham. Speake the Speech I pray you, as I pronounc'd
'Gainst Fortunes State, would Treason haue pronounc'd?
She should in ground vnsanctified haue lodg'd,
the Scripture? the Scripture sayes Adam dig'd;
Let come what comes: onely Ile be reueng'd
'Tis heauie with him: and am I then reueng'd,
Hamlet is of the Faction that is wrong'd,
Priest. Her Obsequies haue bin as farre inlarg'd.
And where 'tis so, th' Offenders scourge is weigh'd
your voice like a peece of vncurrant Gold be not crack'd
Now is he to take Geulles, horridly Trick'd
Ham. Oh Villany! How? Let the doore be lock'd.
So Lust, though to a radiant Angell link'd,
Hor. How was this seal'd?
Within his Truncheons length; whilst they bestil'd
In his true Nature, and we our selues compell'd
To tell him his command'ment is fulfill'd,
An Vnderstanding simple, and vnschool'd:
No hat vpon his head, his stockings foul'd,
Hora. You might haue Rim'd
That from her working, all his visage warm'd;
But let this same be presently perform'd,
To quit him with this arme? And is't not to be damn'd
Be thou a Spirit of health, or Goblin damn'd,
And so am I reueng'd: that would be scann'd,
I am poyson'd
Neuer to rise againe: Thy Mothers poyson'd:
Wherein we saw thee quietly enurn'd,
And with his head ouer his shoulders turn'd,
Was gaged by our King: which had return'd
Kin. To thine owne peace: if he be now return'd,
Are ioyfully return'd
Queen. Drown'd, drown'd
Laer. Alas then, is she drown'd?
Who this had seene, with tongue in Venome steep'd,
Hath now this dread and blacke Complexion smear'd
His Nephewes Leuies, which to him appear'd
Guild. Is in his retyrement, maruellous distemper'd
To feed & cloath thee. Why shold the poor be flatter'd?
A Sable Siluer'd
Taken to Wife; nor haue we heerein barr'd
The youth you breath of guilty, be assur'd
As had he beene encorps't and demy-Natur'd
Ham. Make you a wholsome answere: my wits diseas'd.
King. Part them, they are incens'd
Too oft before the buttons be disclos'd,
When that her Golden Cuplet are disclos'd;
And with them words of so sweet breath compos'd,
and Aunt Mother are deceiu'd
Laer. He is iustly seru'd.
when I was in the City? Are they so follow'd?
soone. Good my Lord, will you see the Players wel bestow'd.
King. Dead
Ham. How now, a Rat? dead for a Ducate, dead
Now pile your dust, vpon the quicke, and dead,
A second time, I kill my Husband dead,
We should prophane the seruice of the dead,
That Rosincrance and Guildensterne are dead:
But let it be: Horatio, I am dead,
shee's dead
Barn. In the same figure, like the King that's dead
But die thy thoughts, when thy first Lord is dead
head
Fall ten times trebble, on that cursed head
The Sourse of this our Watch, and the cheefe head
your Bonet to his right vse, 'tis for the head
Which was declining on the Milkie head
To o're top old Pelion, or the skyish head
to you, that he ha's laid a great wager on your head:
Then young Laertes, in a Riotous head,
With Bisson Rheume: A clout about that head,
With all my imperfections on my head;
And at our more consider'd time wee'l read,
He tooke my Father grossely, full of bread,
But looke, the Morne in Russet mantle clad,
Ham. How came he mad?
Go too, Ile no more on't, it hath made me mad.
Pol. That hath made him mad.
Qu. Alas he's mad
I will be breefe. Your Noble Sonne is mad:
What is't, but to be nothing else but mad.
And then (they say) no Spirit can walke abroad,
When second Husband kisses me in Bed
You promis'd me to Wed:
In the ranke sweat of an enseamed bed,
Let the blunt King tempt you againe to bed,
ere you go to bed
Ile call vpon you ere you go to bed,
Good night, but go not to mine Vnkles bed,
Or in th' incestuous pleasure of his bed,
And thou hadst not come to my bed
No, no, he is dead, go to thy Death-bed,
To be commanded
Pol. This businesse is very well ended.
Qu. Hamlet, thou hast thy Father much offended
Ham. Mother, you haue my Father much offended
Mar. It is offended
Guil. Nor do we finde him forward to be sounded,
But wilt thou heare me how I did proceed?
As false as Dicers Oathes. Oh such a deed,
But we will ship him hence, and this vilde deed,
King. Oh heauy deed:
Ham. Indeed, vpon my sword, Indeed
Osr. It is indifferent cold my Lord indeed
A Combination, and a forme indeed,
To show your selfe your Fathers sonne indeed,
Confound the ignorant, and amaze indeed,
Laer. I know him well, he is the Brooch indeed,
Polon. By'th' Masse, and it's like a Camell indeed
'twas so indeed
Qu. So he ha's indeed
That he cryed out, t'would be a sight indeed,
Could you on this faire Mountaine leaue to feed,
Haue I of Ladies most deiect and wretched,
Of his owne iust remoue: the people muddied,
To the vnsatisfied
Is death of Fathers, and who still hath cried,
beene a Gentlewoman, shee should haue beene buried
will needs be pittied
Whose Blood and Iudgement are so well co-mingled,
that old men haue gray Beards; that their faces are wrinkled;
Since yet thy Cicatrice lookes raw and red
Ham. Pale, or red?
Be all my sinnes remembred
Hor. While one with moderate hast might tell a hundred
while my Father liued; giue twenty, forty, an hundred
That I, the Sonne of the Deere murthered,
Alas, how shall this bloody deede be answered?
That on the superuize no leasure bated,
Wherein our Sauiours Birch is celebrated,
Enter Ophelia distracted.
Rosin. He does confesse he feeles himselfe distracted,
With Hecats Ban, thrice blasted, thrice infected,
Thou mixture ranke, of Midnight Weeds collected,
Ophe. Alas my Lord, I haue beene so affrighted
Rosin. Nay, their indeauour keepes in the wonted
Which now goes too free-footed
Lome, and why of that Lome (whereto he was conuerted)
When th' Ambitious Norwey combatted:
fitted
The memory be greene: and that it vs befitted
And gather by him, as he is behaued,
Or like a creature Natiue, and indued
By desperate appliance are releeued,
It was against your Highnesse, whereat greeued,
Ophe. I was the more deceiued
My Father in his habite, as he liued,
their ill report while you liued
To those of mine. But Vertue, as it neuer wil be moued,
So thinke thou wilt no second Husband wed.
Not shriuing time allowed
the corner of his iaw, first mouth'd to be last swallowed,
Which may to you (perhaps) seeme much vnsinnowed,
Ham. Safely stowed
some Violets, but they wither'd all when my Father dyed:
I thought thy Bride-bed to haue deckt (sweet Maid)
with as much modestie, as cunning. I remember one said,
Polon. Marry, well said;
And as you said, and wisely was it said,
Are burnt and purg'd away? But that I am forbid
Hor. My Lord, I did;
Come short of what he did
Ophe. My honor'd Lord, I know right well you did,
Ham. Doe they hold the same estimation they did
In dreadfull secrecie impart they did,
And you my sinnewes, grow not instant Old;
Vnhouzzled, disappointed, vnnaneld,
Qu. To draw apart the body he hath kild,
Enter Ros. & Guild.
A little Month, or ere those shooes were old,
To mine owne roome againe, making so bold,
Fran. For this releefe much thankes: 'Tis bitter cold,
Ham. The Ayre bites shrewdly: is it very cold?
Fran. Nay answer me: Stand & vnfold
To what I shall vnfold
many pocky Coarses now adaies, that will scarce hold
Should haue a backe or second, that might hold,
i'th' world
I do not know from what part of the world
Laer. My Will, not all the world,
And let me speake to th' yet vnknowing world,
Seemes to me all the vses of this world?
In the corrupted currants of this world,
nothing, but inexplicable dumbe shewes, & noise: I could
in this more then Naturall, if Philosophie could
selfe Sir, should be old as I am, if like a Crab you could
Ham. Oh God, your onely Iigge-maker: what should
but I cannot choose but weepe, to thinke they should
matter: If we could carry Cannon by our sides; I would
As well, we know, or we could and if we would,
That Treason can but peepe to what it would,
you make of me: you would play vpon mee; you would
and
Guildensterne, and
Ham. O God, I could be bounded in a nutshell, and
Guildenstern, and
vp, and
Pol. Looke where he ha's not turn'd his colour, and
Begin Murderer. Pox, leaue thy damnable Faces, and
Crowne, kisses it, and powres poyson in the Kings eares, and
Yases, that crye out on the top of question; and
Feature, Scorne her owne Image, and the verie Age and
preuent your discouery of your secricie to the King and
Hamlet. My Mother: Father and Mother is man and
Barn. Well, goodnight. If you do meet Horatio and
Rosin. Truely, and I hold Ambition of so ayry and
So nightly toyles the subiect of the Land,
And hath shipped me intill the Land,
Of this post-hast, and Romage in the Land.
And both neglect; what if this cursed hand
Laer. Know you the hand?
The Coarse they follow, did with disperate hand,
But to recouer of vs by strong hand
If by direct or by Colaterall hand
Ham. Hold off your hand
Ham. No by this hand
Thus was I, sleeping, by a Brothers hand,
The Treacherous Instrument is in thy hand,
Which let thy wisenesse feare. Away thy hand
Hor. It must be shortly knowne to him from England
I cannot liue to heare the Newes from England,
You from the Polake warres, and you from England
Thus set it downe. He shall with speed to England
that was mad, and sent into England
Ham. I marry, why was he sent into England?
For England
Ham. For England?
for England.
The present death of Hamlet. Do it England,
Osr. Yong Fortinbras, with conquest come fro[m] Poland
You good Cornelius, and you Voltemand,
Put your dread pleasures, more into Command
Ophe. No my good Lord: but as you did command,
But sir, such answers as I can make, you shal command:
An eye like Mars, to threaten or command
Oh royall knauery: An exact command,
one man pick'd out of two thousand
I dare Damnation: to this point I stand,
Coniure the wandring Starres, and makes them stand
Hor. Do, if it will not stand
Clo. What, ar't a Heathen? how doth thou vnderstand
They say, he made a good end;
Gifts, she seemes loath and vnwilling awhile, but in the end,
As make your bowts more violent to the end,
but to one Table that's the end
No more; and by a sleepe, to say we end
And each particular haire to stand an end,
blessing, but not as your daughter may conceiue. Friend
thee well: Welcome good Friends. Oh my olde Friend?
And you must put me in your heart for Friend,
if you deny your greefes to your Friend
For lone oft loses both it selfe and friend:
Ham. Sir my good friend,
Thus it remaines, and the remainder thus. Perpend,
For who not needs, shall neuer lacke a Frend:
I his foule Sonne, do this same Villaine send
And hitherto doth Loue on Fortune tend,
Polon. The time inuites you, goe, your seruants tend
King. Loue? His affections do not that way tend,
Qu. Mad as the Seas, and winde, when both contend
March. Sound
And like a man to double businesse bound,
That Father lost, lost his, and the Suruiuer bound
And peculiar life is bound
As I haue vs'd to do: that I haue found
He tels me my sweet Queene, that he hath found
But better look'd into, he truly found
He rais'd a sigh, so pittious and profound,
Laer. Vpon my life Lamound
King. Full thirtie times hath Phoebus Cart gon round,
Neptunes salt Wash, and Tellus Orbed ground:
It wafts you to a more remoued ground:
Millions of Akers on vs; till our ground
Hor. Friends to this ground
Ham. Vpon what ground?
Marke you your party in conuerse; him you would sound,
Ham. Hic & vbique? Then wee'l shift for grownd,
though you can fret me, you cannot play vpon me. God
His Cannon 'gainst Selfe-slaughter. O God, O God!
I saw you last, by the altitude of a Choppine. Pray God
And of all Christian Soules, I pray God.
Ham. Good
Clown. Giue me leaue; heere lies the water; good:
Polon. That I did my Lord, and was accounted a good
Forme of the thing; each word made true and good,
No Medicine in the world can do thee good.
Yea courb, and woe, for leaue to do him good
It is not, nor it cannot come to good.
Pol. That's good: Inobled Queene is good
Would harrow vp thy soule, freeze thy young blood,
Will want true colour; teares perchance for blood
Were thicker then it selfe with Brothers blood,
Contagion to this world. Now could I drink hot blood,
Repast them with my blood
O're which his Melancholly sits on brood,
So as a painted Tyrant Pyrrhus stood,
Ham. Wormwood, Wormwood
Vpon a fearfull Summons. I haue heard,
Neuer to speake of this that you haue heard:
Our hastie sending. Something haue you heard
Where in necessitie of matter Beggard,
Ophe. He tooke me by the wrist, and held me hard;
It's giuen out, that sleeping in mine Orchard,
Briefe let me be: Sleeping within mine Orchard,
Proclaimes me Bastard:
Barn. Haue you had quiet Guard?
go backward
A damn'd defeate was made. Am I a Coward?
Ham. Come for the third.
Guild. Mine honour'd Lord?
Mar. My good Lord
Pol. Th' Ambassadors from Norwey, my good Lord,
Osricke. I my good Lord
Hor. No my good Lord
Reynol. But my good Lord
Mar. How ist my Noble Lord?
Ile blessing begge of you. For this same Lord,
Rosin. My most deare Lord?
Hora. O my deere Lord
Guil. In what my deere Lord?
Ore-beares your Officers, the rabble call him Lord,
Ophe. My Lord
Hor. I, my Lord
Mar. Nor I, my Lord
Both. Arm'd, my Lord
Hor. & Mar. within. My Lord, my Lord.
Mes. Saue your selfe, my Lord.
Rosin. Take you me for a Spundge, my Lord?
Pol. What a Treasure had he, my Lord?
Ophe. You are merrie, my Lord?
Pol. Do you know me, my Lord?
Ophe. At home, my Lord
Pol. I meane the matter you meane, my Lord
Hor. Not a iot more, my Lord
Laer. Most humbly doe I take my leaue, my Lord
Pol. That's very true, my Lord
Ophe. I thinke nothing, my Lord
1.Play. What speech, my Lord?
Reynol. Well, my Lord.
Both. I, by Heau'n, my Lord
Polon. What followes then, my Lord?
Guil. Prison, my Lord?
Hor. Illo, ho, ho, my Lord
Hor. E'ene so, my Lord
Hor. You will lose this wager, my Lord
Pol. What is the matter, my Lord?
Hor. These are but wild and hurling words, my Lord
Hor. What newes, my Lord?
Ophe. Nay, 'tis twice two moneths, my Lord
Laer. Why out of this, my Lord?
Ophe. What meanes this, my Lord?
Ophe. You are a good Chorus, my Lord
Cap. I will doo't, my Lord
Guild. What, my Lord?
Hor. It might, my Lord
Guild. I know no touch of it, my Lord
Pol. Honest, my Lord?
Ophe. I my Lord
Ophe. I my Lord
Play. I my Lord
Play. I my Lord
Pol. Not I my Lord
Rosin. Where the dead body is bestow'd my Lord,
speake to him againe. What do you read my Lord?
Laer. Dread my Lord,
Rosin. To what end my Lord?
Ophe. Good my Lord,
Reynol. Good my Lord
Rosin. Good my Lord.
Hor. I, good my Lord
Hor. A truant disposition, good my Lord
Hor. Nay, good my Lord
Reynol. Very good my Lord
Hor. What if it tempt you toward the Floud my Lord?
Hor. There's no offence my Lord
Ophe. 'Tis briefe my Lord
Hor. The same my Lord,
What does this meane my Lord?
Both. We doe my Lord
Mar. You shall not goe my Lord
King. Thankes deere my Lord.
Qu. Alas, looke heere my Lord
There my Lord
Hor. Oh where my Lord?
Out of the ayre my Lord?
Pol. I haue my Lord
The woman will be out: Adue my Lord,
Guild. A thing my Lord?
Reynol. As gaming my Lord
Hor. Propose the Oath my Lord
Pol. He hath my Lord:
Reynol. I shall my Lord
Rosin. We shall my Lord.
Hora. Well my Lord.
Hora. Verie well my Lord
Ham. Verie well my Lord,
Polon. Fare you well my Lord
Reynol. I, very well my Lord
Reynol. I will my Lord
Qu. I will my Lord;
Both. We will my Lord.
Rosin. Hoa, Guildensterne? Bring in my Lord.
Ophe. No my Lord
Rosin. We thinke not so my Lord
Rosin. Neither my Lord
Pol. The Actors are come hither my Lord
Qu. How fares my Lord?
Ham. Yes, by Saint Patricke, but there is my Lord,
Ophe. What is my Lord?
Hor. They bleed on both sides. How is't my Lord?
Hor. What's that my Lord?
Hor. Remember it my Lord?
Hor. Doe not my Lord
Rosin. I vnderstand you not my Lord
Pol. I heare him comming, let's withdraw my Lord.
How now my Lord,
Guil. What should we say my Lord?
Ophe. I shall obey my Lord.
Discretion be your Tutor. Sute the Action to the Word,
Tempt him with speed aboord:
Then is my deede, to my most painted word.
Ham. Oh but shee'l keepe her word
I could a Tale vnfold, whose lightest word
So Vnckle there you are: now to my word;
Ham. I Lady, 'twas my word.
The Ratifiers and props of euery word,
Striking too short at Greekes. His anticke Sword,
But with the whiffe and winde of his fell Sword,
Takes Prisoner Pyrrhus eare. For loe, his Sword
And for that purpose Ile annoint my Sword:
Sweare by my Sword
The Courtiers, Soldiers, Schollers: Eye, tongue, sword,
With lesse remorse then Pyrrhus bleeding sword
Ham. Vpon my sword
And lay your hands againe vpon my sword,
Sweare by my sword
But euen then, the Morning Cocke crew lowd;
Bar. He
Arm'd at all points exactly, Cap a Pe,
Let not the Royall Bed of Denmarke be
Till then, in patience our proceeding be.
Neither a borrower, nor a lender be;
A Ministring Angell shall my Sister be,
Queen. If it be;
Vnto that Element: but long it could not be,
But this eternall blason must not be
Ha? Why I should take it: for it cannot be,
Be soft as sinewes of the new-borne Babe,
Would from a Paddocke, from a Bat, a Gibbe,
Or giuen my heart a winking, mute and dumbe,
Where late the Diadem stood, and for a Robe
and Ceremony. Let me comply with you in the Garbe,
He smot the sledded Pollax on the Ice.
For I mine eyes will riuet to his Face:
Laer. If so you'l not o'rerule me to a peace
I haue a voyce, and president of peace
Ham. Then saw you not his face?
Qu. Come, let me wipe thy face
He fals to such perusall of my face,
Pluckes off my Beard, and blowes it in my face?
As they fell out by Time, by Meanes, and Place,
Get you a place
It will but skin and filme the Vlcerous place,
Would gamboll from. Mother, for loue of Grace,
A double blessing is a double grace;
But euen his Mother shall vncharge the practice,
A Sword vnbaited, and in a passe of practice,
Offences gilded hand may shoue by Iustice,
Which done, she tooke the Fruites of my Aduice,
So by my former Lecture and aduice
Breake we our Watch vp, and by my aduice
To an exployt now ripe in my Deuice,
Hora. Heere sweet Lord, at your Seruice
they comming to offer you Seruice
Oh Vengeance!
You that looke pale, and tremble at this chance,
There falling out at Tennis; or perchance,
Lest more mischance
And that our drift looke through our bad performance,
Her Brother is in secret come from France,
Your leaue and fauour to returne to France,
Ham. I doe not thinke so, since he went into France,
My thoughts and wishes bend againe towards France,
Laer. A document in madnesse, thoughts & remembrance
As fits a Kings remembrance
Enter King, Queene, Polonius, Ophelia, Rosincrance,
Enter King, Queene, Polonius, Ophelia, Rosincrance,
These good Fellowes will bring thee where I am. Rosincrance
Qu. Thankes Guildensterne and gentle Rosincrance.
Guild. But these cannot I command to any vtterance
Gods creatures, and make your Wantonnesse, your Ignorance.
Ham. Ile be your foile Laertes, in mine ignorance,
Ham. They are Sheepe and Calues that seek out assurance
One Scoene of it comes neere the Circumstance
You doe remember all the Circumstance
Vnsifted in such perillous Circumstance.
King. And can you by no drift of circumstance
More honour'd in the breach, then the obseruance.
the Word to the Action, with this speciall obseruance:
On such regards of safety and allowance,
Ham. How chances it they trauaile? their residence
It will be laide to vs, whose prouidence
her owne defence?
For Art and exercise in your defence;
But to confront the visage of Offence?
Ham. No, no, they do but iest, poyson in iest, no Offence
King. Haue you heard the Argument, is there no Offence
May one be pardon'd, and retaine th' offence?
That both the worlds I giue to negligence,
For that which thou hast done, must send thee hence
And call it accident: Some two Monthes hence
Rosin. Tell vs where 'tis, that we may take it thence,
How smart a lash that speech doth giue my Conscience?
And with such coozenage; is't not perfect conscience,
Laer. And yet 'tis almost 'gainst my conscience
And call the Noblest to the Audience.
Sir, in this Audience,
Rosin. I my Lord, they stay vpon your patience
Wee'l put on those shall praise your excellence,
To offer it the shew of Violence,
Nor shall you doe mine eare that violence,
I pray you passe with your best violence,
As any the most vulgar thing to sence,
Whose wicked deed, thy most Ingenious sence
Be somewhat scanter of your Maiden presence;
That so his Sicknesse, Age, and Impotence
Reynol. At closes in the consequence:
Each small annexment, pettie consequence
He closes with you in this consequence:
Goodnight sweet Prince,
Ham. How long is that since?
Ham. No, nor mine. Now my Lord, you plaid once
To pricke and sting her. Fare thee well at once;
proofe. I did loue you once
Ophe. There's Rosemary, that's for Remembraunce.
Ham. I am tame Sir, pronounce
It shall as leuell to your Iudgement pierce
Ophe. Could Beautie my Lord, haue better Comerce
And what's in Prayer, but this two-fold force,
As he in his peculiar Sect and force
If thou hast any sound, or vse of Voyce,
name's Gonzago: the Story is extant and writ in choyce
On Fortinbras, he ha's my dying voyce,
Giue euery man thine eare; but few thy voyce:
I did repell his Letters, and deny'de
And reaks not his owne reade
O a Pit of Clay for to be made,
O a Pit of Clay for to be made,
The instant Burst of Clamour that she made
Till of this flat a Mountaine you haue made,
The Lists, and full proportions are all made
Clowne sings. A Pickhaxe and a Spade, a Spade,
Where truth is hid, though it were hid indeede
Sticke fiery off indeede
To keepe it from divulging, let's it feede
King. She sounds to see them bleede
And duller should'st thou be then the fat weede
You neede not tell vs, what Lord Hamlet saide,
Ham. Do you not come your tardy Sonne to chide,
(Thereto prick'd on by a most emulate Pride)
The friends thou hast, and their adoption tride,
Your Grace hath laide the oddes a'th' weaker side
Guild. We will our selues prouide:
Fell in the weeping Brooke, her cloathes spred wide,
Pyrrhus at Priam driues, in Rage strikes wide:
they say, an old man is twice a childe
That's an ill Phrase, a vilde Phrase, beautified is a vilde
Euen whiles mens mindes are wilde,
But if't be hee I meane, hees very wilde;
Too slightly timbred for so loud a Winde,
If Circumstances leade me, I will finde
And thou shalt liue in this faire world behinde,
Thus bad begins and worse remaines behinde
I must be cruell, onely to be kinde;
Ham. A little more then kin, and lesse then kinde
Honour'd, belou'd, and haply, one as kinde.
Rich gifts wax poore, when giuers proue vnkinde.
That thus hath cousend you at hoodman-blinde?
With all the strength and Armour of the minde,
Take these againe, for to the Noble minde
are tickled a'th' sere: and the Lady shall say her minde
too narrow for your minde
The flash and out-breake of a fiery minde,
Hor. She is importunate, indeed distract, her moode
Hold it a fashion and a toy in Bloude;
All from her Fathers death. Oh Gertrude, Gertrude,
Kin. Let's follow, Gertrude:
Why thou art thus Incenst? Let him go Gertrude.
Hee's loued of the distracted multitude,
Friends both go ioyne you with some further ayde:
Giues him three thousand Crownes in Annuall Fee,
Resembles that it was. What it should bee
you make it. Why do you thinke, that I am easier to bee
Ham. I sir, to be honest as this world goes, is to bee
But fall vnshaken, when they mellow bee.
I doe not set my life at a pins fee;
It was the very day, that young Hamlet was borne, hee
Ham. He did Complie with his Dugge before hee
say on: He's for a Iigge, or a tale of Baudry, or hee
flye death. I haue words to speake in your eare, will make thee
Bear't that th' opposed may beware of thee.
Why seemes it so particular with thee
For what aduancement may I hope from thee,
Farewell: my Blessing season this in thee
Mine and my Fathers death come not vpon thee,
In this distracted Globe: Remember thee?
But beare me stiffely vp: Remember thee?
Houses that he makes, lasts till Doomesday: go, get thee
Ham. Heauen make thee free of it, I follow thee.
I say away, goe on, Ile follow thee.
Ham. It wafts me still: goe on, Ile follow thee
Ham. It shall to'th Barbars, with your beard. Prythee
fauour she must come. Make her laugh at that: prythee
And crooke the pregnant Hindges of the knee,
Which now like Fruite vnripe stickes on the Tree,
their eyes purging thicke Amber, or Plum-Tree
Oh limed soule, that strugling to be free,
Make mad the guilty, and apale the free,
against sixe French Swords: their Assignes, and three
For by the image of my Cause, I see
Qu. Nothing at all, yet all that is I see
T'haue seene what I haue seene: see what I see.
Hor. What is it ye would see;
If this should blast in proofe: Soft, let me see
An houre of quiet shortly shall we see;
is the Dukes name, his wife Baptista: you shall see
Y'are welcome Masters, welcome all. I am glad to see
To keepe those many many bodies safe
Mischeefe
King. Laertes, I must common with your greefe,
The Origin and Commencement of this greefe
Of impious stubbornnesse. 'Tis vnmanly greefe,
Together with all Formes, Moods, shewes of Griefe,
Or to the dreadfull Sonnet of the Cliffe,
If it be made of penetrable stuffe;
If once a Widdow, euer I be Wife
life
guilty of his owne death, shortens not his owne life
Vpon whose property, and most deere life,
In thee, there is not halfe an houre of life;
That makes Calamity of so long life:
Throwne out his Angle for my proper life,
Hor. It was, as I haue seene it in his life,
Should be as mortall as an old mans life?
The Serpent that did sting thy Fathers life,
Or, if thou hast vp-hoorded in thy life
Pursued my life
With hoo, such Bugges and Goblins in my life,
Vnto yong Hamlet. For vpon my life,
To grunt and sweat vnder a weary life,
Both heere, and hence, pursue me lasting strife,
loue of Gonzago's wife
You are the Queene, your Husbands Brothers wife,
I hop'd thou should'st haue bin my Hamlets wife:
And liue the purer with the other halfe.
I lou'd your Father, and we loue our Selfe,
Act to doe and to performe; argall she drown'd her selfe
When downe the weedy Trophies, and her selfe,
your selfe
Polon. Obserue his inclination in your selfe
Giuen priuate time to you; and you your selfe
And oft 'tis seene, the wicked prize it selfe
It sends some precious instance of it selfe
Laer. Thought, and Affliction, Passion, Hell it selfe:
Being a thing immortall as it selfe:
Whose violent property foredoes it selfe,
thy selfe-
Woo't weepe? Woo't fight? Woo't teare thy selfe?
With fierie Quicknesse. Therefore prepare thy selfe,
Hor. As thou art to thy selfe,
Where now it burnes, Marcellus and my selfe,
How strange or odde so ere I beare my selfe;
Must render vp my selfe
Liues almost by his lookes: and for my selfe,
Horatio, or I do forget my selfe
That to Laertes I forgot my selfe;
Behinde the Arras Ile conuey my selfe
This Realme dismantled was of Ioue himselfe,
Hyperions curles, the front of Ioue himselfe,
So much from th' vnderstanding of himselfe,
The diuell himselfe
hardly lye in this Boxe; and must the Inheritor himselfe
It is a poyson temp'red by himselfe:
look you, this braue ore-hanging, this Maiesticall Roofe,
But with a crafty Madnesse keepes aloofe:
And that I see in passages of proofe,
That rots it selfe in ease, on Lethe Wharfe,
Stood Challenger on mount of all the Age
It seemes it is as proper to our Age,
You cannot call it Loue: For at your age,
When he is drunke asleepe: or in his Rage,
Will sate it selfe in a Celestiall bed, & prey on Garbage.
With mirth in Funerall, and with Dirge in Marriage,
His Fathers death, and our o're-hasty Marriage.
How much I had to doe to calme his rage?
Nor the deiected hauiour of the Visage,
'Tis too much prou'd, that with Deuotions visage,
And for his passage,
He hath not fayl'd to pester vs with Message,
Beare Hamlet like a Soldier to the Stage,
Ghost cries vnder the Stage.
Colleagued with the dreame of his Aduantage;
King. Arme you, I pray you to this speedie Voyage;
edge
The triumph of his Pledge
Come one you here this fellow in the selleredge
And to those Thornes that in her bosome lodge,
We may of their encounter frankely iudge,
boudge:
Pol. Haue I, my Lord? Assure you, my good Liege,
The speech of vantage. Fare you well my Liege,
That he could nothing doe but wish and begge,
Vertue it selfe, of Vice must pardon begge,
Ham. For if the Sun breed Magots in a dead dogge,
That euen our Loues should with our Fortunes change.
Or quit in answer of the third exchange,
'Tis strange
Hor. Oh day and night: but this is wondrous strange
This world is not for aye, nor 'tis not strange
Ham. Tis very strange
Laer. Had'st thou thy wits, and did'st perswade Reuenge,
begin. Come, the croaking Rauen doth bellow for Reuenge
To heauen. Oh this is hyre and Sallery, not Reuenge.
May sweepe to my Reuenge
Of your deere Fathers death, if writ in your reuenge,
and by what more deare, a better proposer could charge
Polon. Faith no, as you may season it in the charge;
When the compulsiue Ardure giues the charge,
And many such like Assis of great charge,
But what in faith make you from Wittemberge?
a fellow of infinite Iest; of most excellent fancy, he
Polon. What said he?
mad as he
King. But where is he?
him. She
Action. The
Exits. The
laugh, cannot but make the Iudicious greeue; The
Like Niobe, all teares. Why she, euen she.
you are ask't this question next, say a Graue-maker: the
the Foyles bee brought, the Gentleman willing, and the
Ham. There's another: why might not that bee the
imediate tryall, if your Lordship would vouchsafe the
Ophe. You are naught, you are naught, Ile marke the
nor no matter in the phrase, that might indite the
Ham. I will Prophesie. Hee comes to tell me of the
came to passe, as most like it was: The first rowe of the
to tatters, to verie ragges, to split the eares of the
Ophe. Belike this shew imports the Argument of the
in apprehension, how like a God? the beauty of the
Ham. No such matter. I will not sort you with the
Hor. There needs no Ghost my Lord, come from the
transforme Honestie from what is, to a Bawd, then the
Ham. I am but mad North, North-West: when the
remember pleas'd not the Million, 'twas Cauiarie to the
Ham. The phrase would bee more Germaine to the
Clo. What is he that builds stronger then either the
Guil. Which dreames indeed are Ambition: for the
with her. The dead body is carried away: The Poysoner Wooes the
Italian. You shall see anon how the Murtherer gets the
I haue beene in continuall practice; I shall winne at the
are most tyrannically clap't for't: these are now the
Dost thou heare me old Friend, can you play the
by the Carde, or equiuocation will vndoe vs: by the
A Slaue, that is not twentieth part the tythe
The very cause of Hamlets Lunacie
No in despight of Sense and Secrecie,
That you bend your eye on vacancie,
Heere stooping to your Clemencie:
That hee is open to Incontinencie;
it. Go make you readie.
Polon. The best Actors in the world, either for Tragedie,
For vs, and for our Tragedie,
That open'd lies within our remedie
For if the King like not the Comedie,
King. I haue sent to seeke him, and to find the bodie:
Why then belike he likes it not perdie.
But not exprest in fancie; rich, not gawdie:
I cannot tell how: but my Lord, his Maiesty bad me signifie
Ham. I humbly thank you Sir, dost know this waterflie?
We begge your hearing Patientlie
Directly seasons him his Enemie.
Enter Fortinbras with an Armie.
Roses on my rac'd Shooes, get me a Fellowship in a crie
Well ratified by Law, and Heraldrie,
I am iustly kill'd with mine owne Treacherie
Purpose is but the slaue to Memorie,
To tell my Storie.
That does afflict our Natures. I am sorrie,
A Station, like the Herald Mercurie
Is not this something more then Fantasie?
Mar. Horatio saies, 'tis but our Fantasie,
Ham. Extasie?
and the Nation holds it no sinne, to tarre them to Controuersie.
And meant to wracke thee: but beshrew my iealousie:
Then to Entreatie
Of violent Birth, but poore validitie:
For womens Feare and Loue, holds quantitie,
If you desire to know the certaintie
You do freely barre the doore of your owne Libertie,
Thy naturall Magicke, and dire propertie,
That blurres the grace and blush of Modestie,
The liues of many, the cease of Maiestie
That liue and feede vpon your Maiestie
To giue th' assay of Armes against your Maiestie.
then your Honestie?
That he is mad, 'tis true: 'Tis true 'tis pittie,
should admit no discourse to your Beautie
A dull and muddy-metled Rascall, peake
Hor. Stay: speake; speake: I Charge thee, speake.
It selfe to motion, like as it would speake:
Did sometimes march: By Heauen I charge thee speake
(Which happily foreknowing may auoyd) Oh speake.
For Murther, though it haue no tongue, will speake
Qu. Nay, then Ile set those to you that can speake
Hor. Of that I shall haue alwayes cause to speake,
But from what cause he will by no meanes speake
And let the Kettle to the Trumpets speake,
Ham. How absolute the knaue is? wee must speake
King. Why now you speake
deale iustly with me: come, come; nay speake
And (my yong Mistris) thus I did bespeake
But what we do determine, oft we breake:
With Armes encombred thus, or thus, head shake;
into dust; the dust is earth; of earth we make
And he repulsed. A short Tale to make,
When he himselfe might his Quietus make
Clo. I, tell me that, and vnyoake
Hamlet comes backe: what would you vndertake,
What should this meane? Are all the rest come backe?
Nor Customary suites of solemne Blacke,
And that his Soule may be as damn'd and blacke
Ham. So long? Nay then let the Diuel weare blacke,
Ambitious, with more offences at my becke,
To mine Sprindge, Osricke,
King. Giue them the Foyles yong Osricke,
Enter young Osricke.
Enter Osricke.
Come some Musicke
Note, to the top of my Compasse: and there is much Musicke,
Polon. And let him plye his Musicke
mouth, and it will discourse most excellent Musicke.
Of Reuerend Priam, seem'd i'th' Ayre to sticke:
Mar. It faded on the crowing of the Cocke.
Laer. Why as a Woodcocke
A verie verie Paiocke
Do's not diuide the Sunday from the weeke,
I alone became their Prisoner. They haue dealt with mee, like
These hands are not more like
this Line, let me see, let me see: The rugged Pyrrhus like
That thy Rebellion lookes so Gyant-like?
The nights are wholsome, then no Planets strike,
And with a larger tether may he walke,
Wherein the Spirit held his wont to walke.
Yet there is Method in't: will you walke
And curd, like Aygre droppings into Milke,
That it did seeme to shatter all his bulke,
declines his head vpon her neck. Layes him downe vpon a Banke
I bought an Vnction of a Mountebanke
What forgeries you please; marry, none so ranke,
Ophe. I do not know, my Lord, what I should thinke
Your wisedome best shall thinke
to play at Loggets with 'em? mine ake to thinke
You must not thinke
Qu. No, no, the drinke, the drinke.
Oh my deere Hamlet, the drinke, the drinke,
King. Stay, giue me drinke.
Till that her garments, heauy with her drinke,
King. Gertrude, do not drinke
Enter Hamlet reading on a Booke.
We will bestow our selues: Reade on this booke,
If I had playd the Deske or Table-booke,
Sprinkle coole patience. Whereon do you looke?
Queen. There is a Willow growes aslant a Brooke,
Mar. No, it is strooke
So bloodily hast strooke
And in this vpshot, purposes mistooke,
King. The doores are broke
Clambring to hang; an enuious sliuer broke,
Rosin. Then thus she sayes: your behauior hath stroke
The neede we haue to vse you, did prouoke
Ham. That is Laertes, a very Noble youth: Marke
My sea-gowne scarft about me in the darke,
Who in her Dutie and Obedience, marke,
Ophe. Pray you marke.
Ophe. Say you? Nay pray you marke.
In which the Maiesty of buried Denmarke
FINIS. The tragedie of HAMLET, Prince of Denmarke.
A Serpent stung me: so the whole eare of Denmarke,
Mar. Something is rotten in the State of Denmarke
Ham. There's nere a villaine dwelling in all Denmarke
the King himselfe, for your Succession in Denmarke?
At least I'm sure it may be so in Denmarke;
And let thine eye looke like a Friend on Denmarke.
From whence, though willingly I came to Denmarke
Osr. Your Lordship is right welcome back to Denmarke
Will the King heare this peece of Worke?
What might you thinke? No, I went round to worke,
Then venome to thy worke.
A rowsed Vengeance sets him new a-worke,
Why such impresse of Ship-wrights, whose sore Taske
I suffred much extreamity for loue: very neere this. Ile
cheefe Speech in it, I cheefely lou'd, 'twas Aeneas Tale
Which was the Modell of that Danish Seale:
Where euery God did seeme to set his Seale,
(My feares forgetting manners) to vnseale
Polon. Verie like a Whale
Ham. Or like a Whale?
Barn. How now Horatio? You tremble & look pale:
Hor. Nay very pale
know not what we may be. God be at your Table
King. Set me the Stopes of wine vpon that Table:
King. 'Tis sweet and commendable
For it is as the Ayre, invulnerable,
King. As of a man, faithfull and Honourable
How weary, stale, flat, and vnprofitable
Be thy euents wicked or charitable,
Oh horrible Oh horrible, most horrible:
Ham. Is't possible?
Hor. Ist possible?
Blacke as his purpose, did the night resemble
The hey-day in the blood is tame, it's humble,
Vouchers vouch him no more of his Purchases, and double
Ham. O my Propheticke soule: mine Vncle?
Ham. Then you liue about her waste, or in the middle
Ham. They are comming to the Play: I must be idle.
Rapiers and Poniards, with their assignes, as Girdle,
Queen. One woe doth tread vpon anothers heele,
What's neere it, with it. It is a massie wheele
Breake all the Spokes and Fallies from her wheele,
Grapple them to thy Soule, with hoopes of Steele:
Bow stubborne knees, and heart with strings of Steele,
That thou dead Coarse againe in compleat steele,
I had not quoted him. I feare he did but trifle,
Rosin. The single
May fit vs to our shape, if this should faile;
I saw him enter such a house of saile;
The winde sits in the shoulder of your saile,
Woo't drinke vp Esile, eate a Crocodile?
Sweet, leaue me heere a while,
Depriu'd thee of. Hold off the earth a while,
Hor. Season your admiration for a while
Bar. Sit downe a-while,
As to expend your time with vs a-while,
Ham. Ile play this bout first, set by a-while.
Absent thee from felicitie awhile,
When we haue shuffel'd off this mortall coile,
My spirits grow dull, and faine I would beguile
Vngartred, and downe giued to his Anckle,
Would haue mourn'd longer) married with mine Vnkle,
In equall Scale weighing Delight and Dole
When yond same Starre that's Westward from the Pole
All Flaxen was his Pole:
till he find it stopping a bunghole
Roaming it thus, you'l tender me a foole
Vpon my secure hower thy Vncle stole
That from a shelfe, the precious Diadem stole,
So frown'd he once, when in an angry parle
Polon. Affection, puh. You speake like a greene Girle,
pace; But there is Sir an ayrie of Children, little
Nor what he spake, though it lack'd Forme a little,
They shall go farre with little
A Cutpurse of the Empire and the Rule.
The inward seruice of the Minde and Soule
When the Bloud burnes, how Prodigall the Soule
may giue it Smoothnesse. O it offends mee to the Soule,
O step betweene her, and her fighting Soule,
Clo. One that was a woman Sir; but rest her Soule,
To take him in the purging of his Soule,
Gramercy on his Soule.
I hold my dutie, as I hold my Soule,
Euen with the verie Comment of my Soule
And my Imaginations are as foule
She's so coniunctiue to my life, and soule;
And we shall ioyntly labour with your soule
Lay not a flattering Vnction to your soule,
Was not like Madnesse. There's something in his soule?
Laer. The deuill take thy soule
Thou turn'st mine eyes into my very soule,
would driue me into a toyle?
Brutus kill'd me
This in Obedience hath my daughter shew'd me:
Quoth she before you tumbled me,
And they shall heare and iudge 'twixt you and me;
(Things standing thus vnknowne) shall liue behind me.
Gho. Marke me
Who is't that can informe me?
To speake of horrors: he comes before me
here he sayes alone: Can you aduise me?
Inuite me,
Rosin. My Lord, you once did loue me
Ham. Nay then I haue an eye of you: if you loue me
Pol. What do you thinke of me?
I am affear'd you make a wanton of me
Hora. What are they that would speake with me?
I pray you go with me.
To punish me with this, and this with me,
Laer. It well appeares. But tell me,
Kin. Come Hamlet, come, and take this hand from me
Clo. 'Tis a quicke lye Sir, 'twill away againe from me
Nor thine on me.
And to the last, bended their light on me
If it be so, as so tis put on me;
I pray you pardon me
Would make them capeable. Do not looke vpon me,
What thou hast saide to me
His accesse to me
That may to thee do ease, and grace to me; speak to me.
Of his affection to me
Stand dumbe and speake not to him. This to me
Adue, adue, Hamlet: remember me.
Qu. What wilt thou do? thou wilt not murther me?
King, Father, Royall Dane: Oh, oh, answer me,
Laer. Come one for me
Ham. Indeed, indeed Sirs; but this troubles me.
Blasted with extasie. Oh woe is me,
By Heau'n, Ile make a Ghost of him that lets me:
And do't the speedier, that you may direct me
King. With all my heart, and it doth much content me
Qu. Haue you forgot me?
not me?
In noise so rude against me?
But sure the brauery of his griefe did put me
How otherwise will you be rul'd by me?
Qu. Come hither my good Hamlet, sit by me
To Reason most absurd, whose common Theame
Qu. Oh my Sonne, what Theame?
of a Dreame
That shewes his hore leaues in the glassie streame:
And set a double varnish on the fame
And melt in her owne fire. Proclaime no shame,
Polon. Yet heere Laertes? Aboord, aboord for shame,
Alacke, and fie for shame:
By Cocke they are too blame.
I can no more, the King, the King's too blame
Threatning the flame
Oh good Horatio, what a wounded name,
That liberall Shepheards giue a grosser name;
you gidge, you amble, and you lispe, and nickname
Our State to be disioynt, and out of Frame,
Kin. The very same
That can denote me truly. These indeed Seeme,
This sodaine sending him away, must seeme
nor Woman neither; though by your smiling you seeme
Ham. Why I will fight with him vppon this Theme.
Were nothing but to waste Night, Day, and Time.
But that I know Loue is begun by Time:
So hallow'd, and so gracious is the time
My Pulse as yours doth temperately keepe time,
For who would beare the Whips and Scornes of time,
Whereas they had deliuer'd both in time,
Why day is day; night, night; and time is time,
To keepe my name vngorg'd. But till that time,
To morrow is S[aint]. Valentines day, all in the morning betime,
Qu. Did you assay him to any pastime?
may doe well to thee. Too't againe, Come
wife: man & wife is one flesh, and so my mother. Come,
your owne inclining? Is it a free visitation? Come,
When Rossius an Actor in Rome-
Ham. Hillo, ho, ho, boy; come bird, come
There with fantasticke Garlands did she come,
I doubt some foule play: would the Night were come;
To let this Canker of our nature come
Ham. He will stay till ye come
For her perfections. But my reuenge will come
Be as our selfe in Denmarke. Madam come,
Laer. I'm lost in it my Lord; but let him come,
That if againe this Apparition come,
Repent what's past, auoyd what is to come,
Hor. Haue after, to what issue will this come?
Abridgements come.
Gho. My hower is almost come,
Then are dream't of in our Philosophy. But come,
For in that sleepe of death, what dreames may come,
Oh heere they come.
Ham. You are welcome
Ham. And therefore as a stranger giue it welcome.
To beare our hearts in greefe, and our whole Kingdome
I haue some Rites of memory in this Kingdome,
Hamlet return'd, shall know you are come home:
Most welcome home.
Her Maiden strewments, and the bringing home
To heare the Processe. Ile warrant shee'l tax him home,
With tristfull visage as against the doome,
Ile lugge the Guts into the Neighbor roome,
Guild. Good my Lord put your discourse into some
the right breed. If it shall please you to make me a wholsome
The Soule of Nero, enter this firme bosome:
And to the manner borne: It is a Custome
Horat. Is it a custome?
At last, a little shaking of mine Arme:
Then goes he to the length of all his arme;
No Faiery talkes, nor Witch hath power to Charme:
And as the sleeping Soldiours in th' Alarme,
In filiall Obligation, for some terme
The glasse of Fashion, and the mould of Forme,
Together with that Faire and Warlike forme
And there assumes some other horrible forme,
But as we often see against some storme,
within the ring. Masters, you are all welcome: wee'l e'ne
Author of affectation, but cal'd it an honest method. One
Ham. One
I am more an Antike Roman then a Dane:
Damned Dane,
Mar. And Leige-men to the Dane
You cannot speake of Reason to the Dane,
Hamlet the Dane
So much as from Occasions you may gleane,
To cast thee vp againe? What may this meane?
Enter Rosincrane.
Hath seal'd thee for her selfe. For thou hast bene
About the World haue times twelue thirties beene,
And thirtie dozen Moones with borrowed sheene,
Ophe. You are keene my Lord, you are keene
I know my course. The Spirit that I haue seene
It is a damned Ghost that we haue seene:
What we two Nights haue seene
Ham. Neuer to speake of this that you haue seene.
Will so bestow our selues, that seeing vnseene
Clo. Why heere in Denmarke: I haue bin sixeteene
Ham. The inobled Queene?
Maiesty: this to the Queene
Ham. How does the Queene?
Enter Queene.
Therefore our sometimes Sister, now our Queene,
Enter King and his Queene.
The will of my most seeming vertuous Queene:
Our purpose may hold there; how sweet Queene.
My Crowne, mine owne Ambition, and my Queene:
And that your Grace hath screen'd, and stoode betweene
Osr. The King Sir, hath laid that in a dozen passes betweene
Haue by the very cunning of the Scoene,
Will nothing sticke our persons to Arraigne
And carriage of the Article designe,
Ham. Nay come, againe
Laer. Well: againe
Ham. Ile watch to Night; perchance 'twill wake againe
Who was (if praises may go backe againe)
I shall not look vpon his like againe
He neuer wil come againe.
And will he not come againe:
Ophe. And will he not come againe,
And the Kings Rouce, the Heauens shall bruite againe,
But soft, behold: Loe, where it comes againe:
Looke where it comes againe
Now feare I this will giue it start againe;
Enter Ghost againe.
Would haue reuerted to my Bow againe,
Will bring him to his wonted way againe,
you, and Spundge you shall be dry againe
Ham. A Murderer, and a Villaine:
That one may smile, and smile and be a Villaine;
Oh Villaine, Villaine, smiling damned Villaine!
Remorselesse, Treacherous, Letcherous, kindles villaine!
With this Slaues Offall, bloudy: a Bawdy villaine,
Pol. Oh I am slaine.
That he which hath your Noble Father slaine,
But in Battalians. First, her Father slaine,
Hamlet in madnesse hath Polonius slaine,
Hamlet, thou art slaine,
Qu. I doubt it is no other, but the maine,
And we beseech you, bend you to remaine
And in this harsh world draw thy breath in paine,
Qu. This is the very coynage of your Braine,
Qu. Sleepe rocke thy Braine,
Within the Booke and Volume of my Braine,
A Scullion? Fye vpon't: Foh. About my Braine.
Ham. Not where he eats, but where he is eaten, a certaine
Hor. That is most certaine
Then weight what losse your Honour may sustaine,
Thou hast cleft my heart in twaine
And neuer come mischance betweene vs twaine.
Receiues rebuke from Norwey: and in fine,
Nature is fine in Loue, and where 'tis fine,
And that I hope will teach you to imagine-
King. Take thy faire houre Laertes, time be thine,
Hamlet, this Pearle is thine,
Ham. Thou dost lye in't, to be in't and say 'tis thine:
He that thou knowest thine,
Ile doo't. Dost thou come heere to whine;
I made to her in Marriage; and to decline
And I do thinke, or else this braine of mine
I haue a daughter: haue, whil'st she is mine,
for my part, I doe not lye in't; and yet it is mine
The thin and wholsome blood: so did it mine;
Ham. That I can keepe your counsell, and not mine
words are not mine
the laying in) he will last you some eight yeare, or nine
And I a Maid at your Window, to be your Valentine.
Like Quilles vpon the fretfull Porpentine:
Whilst like a puft and recklesse Libertine
How now? What hath befalne?
Ham. Compounded it with dust, whereto 'tis Kinne
Cut off euen in the Blossomes of my Sinne,
My too much changed Sonne.
Start vp, and stand an end. Oh gentle Sonne,
Our cheefest Courtier Cosin, and our Sonne
Good Gertrude set some watch ouer your Sonne,
Where is your Sonne?
Then that which deerest Father beares his Sonne,
But now my Cosin Hamlet, and my Sonne?
You laying these slight sulleyes on my Sonne,
So would I ha done by yonder Sunne,
Rosin. Then is the World one
The Bell then beating one
Ophe. How should I your true loue know from another one?
To you your selfe, to vs, to euery one.
Sindging his pate against the burning Zone,
Away, for euery thing is Seal'd and done
Priest. No more be done:
Laer. Must there no more be done ?
Make vs againe count o're, ere loue be done.
Speake to me. If there be any good thing to be done,
With sore distraction? What I haue done
Shewes it selfe pure. He weepes for what is done
And thou must cure me: Till I know 'tis done,
Qu. Oh me, what hast thou done?
Yet now I must confesse, that duty done,
He is dead and gone Lady, he is dead and gone,
Euen on the pith of life. Where is he gone?
Let shame say what it will; when these are gone
Mar. 'Tis gone.
Your better Wisedomes, which haue freely gone
Ham. I so, God buy'ye: Now I am alone.
Attends the boystrous Ruine. Neuer alone
To you alone
For nature cressant does not grow alone,
He is gone, he is gone, and we cast away mone,
Other. Why he had none
I will speake Daggers to her, but vse none:
Bap. So many iournies may the Sunne and Moone
Reuisits thus the glimpses of the Moone,
If she vnmaske her beauty to the Moone:
By his Cockle hat and staffe, and his Sandal shoone
My custome alwayes in the afternoone;
Did the King sighe, but with a generall grone
You are the most immediate to our Throne,
Would like the Spring that turneth Wood to Stone,
At his head a grasse-greene Turfe, at his heeles a stone.
On Mars his Armours, forg'd for proofe Eterne,
Enter King, Rosincrance, and Guildensterne.
Enter Polonius, Rosincrance, and Guildensterne.
Enter Ros. and Guildensterne.
King. Welcome deere Rosincrance and Guildensterne.
Enter Rosincrance and Guildensterne.
Enter Rosincran and Guildensterne.
Enter Hamlet and Guildensterne.
King. Thankes Rosincrance, and gentle Guildensterne
The vndiscouered Countrey, from whose Borne
In Denmarkes Crowne haue worne.
King. 'Tis deepely sworne:
Since Frost it selfe, as actiuely doth burne,
th' Occasions of my sodaine, and more strange returne.
you my good friends, deserued at the hands of Fortune,
The Slings and Arrowes of outragious Fortune,
I tooke thee for thy Betters, take thy Fortune,
For me, with sorrow, I embrace my Fortune,
With an intreaty heerein further shewne,
the Mirrour vp to Nature; to shew Vertue her owne
Our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our owne.
Ham. Be not too tame neyther: but let your owne
His greatnesse weigh'd, his will is not his owne;
And thrice his head thus wauing vp and downe;
1.Play. Run bare-foot vp and downe,
And breake your owne necke downe
They had begun the Play. I sate me downe,
Th' obseru'd of all Obseruers, quite, quite downe.
Hor. Well, sit we downe,
And as he dreines his draughts of Renish downe,
excellent Play; well digested in the Scoenes, set downe
As therein are set downe
My Tables, my Tables; meet it is I set it downe,
Leaue wringing of your hands, peace, sit you downe,
Antiquity forgot, Custome not knowne,
As are Companions noted and most knowne
Now weares his Crowne
marke you that? But if the water come to him & drowne
As if encrease of Appetite had growne
Deliberate pause, diseases desperate growne,
Rosin. None my Lord; but that the World's growne
Ophe. O what a Noble minde is heere o're-throwne?
That our Deuices still are ouerthrowne,
And after we will both our iudgements ioyne,
That Soop-stake you will draw both Friend and Foe,
That he should weepe for her? What would he doe,
Say, why is this? wherefore? what should we doe?
Theeues of Mercy, but they knew what they did. I am to doe
That you know ought of me; this not to doe:
Hee may not, as vnuallued persons doe,
Doe not as some vngracious Pastors doe,
I once did hold it as our Statists doe,
Ham. Come show me what thou'lt doe.
And end his being. That done, he lets me goe,
Hor. Be rul'd, you shall not goe
Ham. From top to toe?
These, but the Trappings, and the Suites of woe
To be contracted in one brow of woe:
Let the Birds flye, and like the famous Ape
Ile speake to it, though Hell it selfe should gape
Thou com'st in such a questionable shape
Ham. Do you see that Clowd? that's almost in shape
Ophe. I shall th' effect of this good Lesson keepe,
And how, and who; what meanes; and where they keepe:
The tedious day with sleepe
And by opposing end them: to dye, to sleepe
Deuoutly to be wish'd. To dye to sleepe,
And Conuoy is assistant; doe not sleepe,
For some must watch, while some must sleepe;
Forth at your eyes, your spirits wildely peepe,
To try Conclusions in the Basket, creepe
Ham. Why let the strucken Deere go weepe,
vpon this Pipe?
Pol. What hoa, helpe, helpe, helpe
For out adores he went without their helpe;
The Barke is readie, and the winde at helpe,
No, let the Candied tongue, like absurd pompe,
For the supply and profit of our Hope,
To businesse with the King, more then the scope
And pious Action, we do surge o're
too light, for the law of Writ, and the Liberty. These are
from you: wee coated them on the way, and hither are
How pregnant (sometimes) his Replies are?
I say, we will haue no more Marriages. Those that are
Do ye heare, let them be well vs'd: for they are
O're whom his very madnesse like some Oare
Heere is your Husband, like a Mildew'd eare
And Ile be plac'd so, please you in the eare
All giuen to mine eare
Sith you haue heard, and with a knowing eare,
foolish eare
And wants not Buzzers to infect his eare
With a bare Bodkin? Who would these Fardles beare
Ham. Why, what should be the feare?
Almost to Ielly with the Act of feare,
Be wary then, best safety lies in feare;
For we will Fetters put vpon this feare,
The vertue of his feare: but you must feare
Ham. For Heauens loue let me heare
Ham. Nor did you nothing heare?
Ham. Speake, I am bound to heare
King. Oh speake of that, that I do long to heare
Would'st thou not stirre in this. Now Hamlet heare:
Gho. So art thou to reuenge, when thou shalt heare
Where thrift may follow faining? Dost thou heare,
How these things came about. So shall you heare
Since Nature makes them partiall, should o're-heare
Hor. Tush, tush, 'twill not appeare
[The Tragedie of Hamlet by William Shakespeare 1599]
And on his graue raines many a teare,
As Peace should still her wheaten Garland weare,
Sweare
Gho. Sweare.
Gho. Sweare
Gho. Sweare
Ghost. Sweare
Consent to sweare
great mans Memorie, may out-liue his life halfe a yeare:
yeare. A Tanner will last you nine yeare
Hor. Halfe a share
Where it drawes blood, no Cataplasme so rare,
Of each vnhatch't, vnfledg'd Comrade. Beware
abhorred my Imagination is, my gorge rises at it. Heere
For thou dost know: Oh Damon deere,
He walkes foure houres together, heere
Much heate, and him. Ile silence me e'ene heere:
And to my mind, though I am natiue heere,
Drinke off this Potion: Is thy Vnion heere?
And much offence too, touching this Vision heere:
Is it not monstrous that this Player heere,
Hor. Peace, who comes heere?
And now reignes heere.
Barn. 'Tis heere
Hor. 'Tis heere
The Glow-worme showes the Matine to be neere,
Youth to it selfe rebels, though none else neere
Ham. Slanders Sir: for the Satyricall slaue saies here,
King. At Supper? Where?
That as the Starre moues not but in his Sphere,
Polon. You goe to seeke my Lord Hamlet; there
That youth and obseruation coppied there;
Hath in the skirts of Norway, heere and there,
Ham. I would I had beene there
It had bin so with vs had we beene there:
What is the issue of the businesse there
Ham. Do you see nothing there?
King. Go seeke him there
Bar. Say, what is Horatio there?
wits there; or if he do not, it's no great matter there
Barnardo. Who's there?
Fran. I thinke I heare them. Stand: who's there?
Oh Hamlet, what a falling off was there,
That he, as 'twere by accident, may there
Laer. Drown'd! O where?
To England send him: Or confine him where
Ham. Why any thing. But to the purpose; you were
Answere
Osr. Exceedingly, my Lord, it is very soultry, as 'twere
And gins to pale his vneffectuall Fire:
Deuis'd a new Commission, wrote it faire,
Ham. Are you faire?
To their vilde Murthers, roasted in wrath and fire,
Let all the Battlements their Ordinance fire,
Doubt thou, the Starres are fire,
Ham. What, frighted with false fire
Out of the shot and danger of Desire.
As if it some impartment did desire
For euery man ha's businesse and desire,
It is most retrograde to our desire:
Grop'd I to finde out them; had my desire,
Then vp he rose, & don'd his clothes, & dupt the chamber dore,
Queene: moult no feather, I haue of late, but wherefore
And thus o're-sized with coagulate gore,
Let in the Maid, that out a Maid, neuer departed more
And thinke it pastime. You shortly shall heare more,
To keepe it selfe from noyance: but much more,
Whose voyce will draw on more:
Qu. No more.
The suppliance of a minute? No more
Qu. Oh speake to me, no more,
Ham. Why one faire Daughter, and no more,
Qu. O Hamlet, speake no more.
or rather you say, my Mother: therfore no more
The interim's mine, and a mans life's no more
Laer. Thinke it no more:
ha's teares in's eyes. Pray you no more
Makes Vow before his Vnkle, neuer more
Laer. I thanke you: Keepe the doore.
Vpon a wretch, whose Naturall gifts were poore
The Souldiours Musicke, and the rites of Warre
Quarelling, drabbing. You may goe so farre
to his Purgation, would perhaps plundge him into farre
Lord Hamlet is a Prince out of thy Starre,
And Forraigne Mart for Implements of warre:
Behinde the Arras, hearing something stirre,
The termes of our estate, may not endure
And pittie it is true: A foolish figure,
You heauenly Guards. What would your gracious figure?
Ham. That you must teach me: but let mee coniure
Mar. Thus twice before, and iust at this dead houre,
Fran. You come most carefully vpon your houre
And in the Porches of mine eares did poure
Hunts not the traile of Policie, so sure
pleasure
Haue you so slander any moment leisure,
Ham. Here's the Commission, read it at more leysure:
Osr. Sweet Lord, if your friendship were at leysure,
Making Night hidious? And we fooles of Nature,
Till the foule crimes done in my dayes of Nature
Yet so farre hath Discretion fought with Nature,
Laer. I am satisfied in Nature,
That growes to Seed: Things rank, and grosse in Nature
So crimefull, and so Capitall in Nature,
A fault against the Dead, a fault to Nature,
A Violet in the youth of Primy Nature;
Ham. To this effect Sir, after what flourish your nature
Pol. Indeed that is out o'th' Ayre:
Promontory; this most excellent Canopy the Ayre,
Whether in Sea, or Fire, in Earth, or Ayre,
But soft, me thinkes I sent the Mornings Ayre;
Hor. It is a nipping and an eager ayre
frame, and start not so wildely from my affayre
Among a Minerall of Mettels base
Will not peruse the Foiles? So that with ease,
Ham. Sir, I will walke heere in the Hall; if it please
We heard it all. My Lord, do as you please,
But like the Owner of a foule disease,
Or not to crack the winde of the poore Phrase,
Or by pronouncing of some doubtfull Phrase;
bosome, these
King. I haue nothing with this answer Hamlet, these
Horatio, When thou shalt haue ouerlook'd this, giue these
Last, and as much containing as all these,
I know not, lost all my mirth, forgone all custome of exercise;
Hath giuen me this: now gather, and surmise.
Till then sit still my soule; foule deeds will rise,
Vnbated and envenom'd: the foule practise
For who that's but a Queene, faire, sober, wise,
When it prou'd otherwise?
Pol. Take this from this; if this be otherwise,
is your onely Emperor for diet. We fat all creatures else
As by your Safety, Wisedome, all things else,
Laer. What Cerimony else?
Laer. What Cerimony else?
That it is proofe and bulwarke against Sense
As my great power thereof may giue thee sense,
the daintier sense
Cals Vertue Hypocrite, takes off the Rose
Hath 'tane with equall Thankes. And blest are those,
does well; but how does it well? it does well to those
he suffer not thinking on, with the Hoby-horsse, whose
thing so ouer-done, is fro[m] the purpose of Playing, whose
Generall: but it was (as I receiu'd it, and others, whose
The passion ending, doth the purpose lose.
King. Follow her close,
And I do doubt the hatch, and the disclose
Or with a little shuffling, you may choose
How dangerous is it that this man goes loose:
What to our selues in passion we propose,
Is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose.
And to such wondrous doing brought his Horse,
When he lay couched in the Ominous Horse,
Ophe. Still better and worse
I had my fathers Signet in my Purse,
In obstinate Condolement, is a course
And with their corporall ayre do hold discourse.
Ham. Then can each Actor on his Asse-
You go not till I set you vp a glasse,
Yea this solidity and compound masse,
That it might please you to giue quiet passe
to thee; if thou answerest me not to the purpose, confesse
Laer. A touch, a touch, I do confesse
So tell him with the occurrents more and lesse,
Without debatement further, more or lesse,
Kin. This is meere Madnesse:
Mad call I it; for to define true Madnesse,
Pol. Though this be madnesse,
And I the matter will re-word: which madnesse
That I essentially am not in madnesse,
Roughly awake, I heere proclaime was madnesse:
And makes as healthfull Musicke. It is not madnesse
force of Honestie can translate Beautie into his likenesse.
A happinesse,
And that shall lend a kinde of easinesse
Hor. Custome hath made it in him a property of easinesse
Answer, and thinke vpon this Businesse.
my Businesse
She turnes to Fauour, and to prettinesse
Thence to a Watch, thence into a Weaknesse,
It lifted vp it head, and did addresse
Of this his Nephewes purpose, to suppresse
Vpon our first, he sent out to suppresse
As one incapable of her owne distresse,
Each toy seemes Prologue, to some great amisse,
And wager on your heads, he being remisse,
Who calles me Villaine? breakes my pate a-crosse?
Of death's put on by cunning, and forc'd cause,
For this effect defectiue, comes by cause,
Like Iohn a-dreames, vnpregnant of my cause,
That your good Beauties be the happy cause
Doth rend the Region. So after Pyrrhus pause,
Both countenance, and excuse.
To tell the secrets of my Prison-House;
Pinch Wanton on your cheeke, call you his Mouse,
There was he gaming, there o'retooke in's Rouse,
That I haue shot mine Arrow o're the house,
Ham. The King doth wake to night, and takes his rouse,
after his desart, and who should scape whipping: vse
Since my deere Soule was Mistris of my choyse,
If thou art priuy to thy Countries Fate
They are not neere my Conscience; their debate
deare to fancy, very responsiue to the hilts, most delicate
Ham. Excellent Ifaith, of the Camelions dish: I eate
I, thou poore Ghost, while memory holds a seate
But woe is me, you are so sicke of late,
What haue you giuen him any hard words of late?
Tis told me he hath very oft of late
And our affaires from England come too late,
King. It is the poyson'd Cup, it is too late
My Liege, and Madam, to expostulate
Ham. Why, euen in that was Heauen ordinate;
Queene returnes, findes the King dead, and makes passionate
Tweakes me by'th' Nose? giues me the Lye i'th' Throate,
Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding Throate
Set your entreatments at a higher rate,
Let me be no Assistant for a State,
Th' imperiall Ioyntresse of this warlike State,
The sanctity and health of the whole State.
Th' expectansie and Rose of the faire State,
This boades some strange erruption to our State
(And it doth well appeare vnto our State)
Of his true state
So farre from cheere, and from your former state,
Fore do it owne life; 'twas some Estate.
At gaming, swearing, or about some acte
That are but Mutes or audience to this acte:
To lay our Seruices freely at your feete,
for and a shrowding-Sheete:
O me thought there was nothing meete
for such a Guest is meete
for such a Guest is meete
me thought it was very sweete:
Phrase: but you shall heare these in her excellent white
As of a Father; For let the world take note,
As Vulcans Stythe. Giue him needfull note,
Or such ambiguous giuing out to note,
With Heraldry more dismall: Head to foote
Both. My Lord, from head to foote
King. Follow him at foote,
That thou so many Princes, at a shoote,
Go, bid the Souldiers shoote.
The effects of what I wrote?
Eates not the Flats with more impittious haste
For the demand of our neglected Tribute:
I was about say somthing: where did I leaue?
Occasion smiles vpon a second leaue
Laer. I pray you giue me leaue
King. Haue you your Fathers leaue?
Reynol. My Lord I haue
a good turne for them. Let the King haue the Letters I haue
or Norman, haue so strutted and bellowed, that I haue
Qu. What would she haue?
Clo. Ifaith, if he be not rotten before he die (as we haue
And makes vs rather beare those illes we haue,
not true. Let me question more in particular: what haue
Who was in life, a foolish prating Knaue.
But hee's an arrant knaue
Other. I tell thee she is, and therefore make her Graue
To outface me with leaping in her Graue?
And not t'haue strew'd thy Graue
Ham. Into my Graue?
Who? What an Asse am I? I sure, this is most braue,
Leaps in the graue.
Is now most still, most secret, and most graue,
Pol. It shall do well. But yet do I beleeue
Hor. Before my God, I might not this beleeue
reckon my grones; but that I loue thee best, oh most Best beleeue
Which we do tender, as we deerely greeue
Ham. If thou doest Marry, Ile giue thee this Plague
Ham. Go, go, you question with an idle tongue
Qu. Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue
See thou Character. Giue thy thoughts no tongue,
Giue it an vnderstanding but no tongue;
himselfe, there are no tongues else for's tongue
But breake my heart, for I must hold my tongue.
Enter Prologue.
what Lenton entertainment the Players shall receiue
a thousand pound. Did'st perceiue?
They finde vs touch'd, we will our Kingdome giue,
then I haue thoughts to put them in imagination, to giue
And thy Commandment all alone shall liue
Ham. Nay, but to liue
Taint not thy mind; nor let thy Soule contriue
Ha. No good Mother, here's Mettle more attractiue
I could not but by her. The other Motiue,
Vpon the Platforme twixt eleuen and twelue,
Hor. I thinke it lacks of twelue
Anon as patient as the female Doue,
Fare you well my Doue
Whether Loue lead Fortune, or else Fortune Loue.
This is the very extasie of Loue,
Could not (with all there quantitie of Loue)
Are base respects of Thrift, but none of Loue.
As meditation, or the thoughts of Loue,
And with no lesse Nobility of Loue,
King. But how hath she receiu'd his Loue?
Polon. Mad for thy Loue?
Buyes out the Law; but 'tis not so aboue,
To contract O the time for a my behoue,
loue.
But neuer Doubt, I loue.
our youth, by the Obligation of our euer-preserued loue,
In youth when I did loue, did loue,
I do receiue your offer'd loue like loue,
Stew'd in Corruption; honying and making loue
Ophe. My Lord, he hath importun'd me with loue,
If thou didst euer thy deare Father loue
More greefe to hide, then hate to vtter loue.
This mad yong man. But so much was our loue,
Ham. I could interpret betweene you and your loue:
Ham. As Womans loue.
From the faire forehead of an innocent loue,
Guild. O my Lord, if my Dutie be too bold, my loue
Bapt. The instances that second Marriage moue,
Doubt, that the Sunne doth moue:
Yet the vnshaped vse of it doth moue
This must be knowne, being kept close might moue
For 'tis a question left vs yet to proue,
As hardy as the Nemian Lions nerue:
This aboue all; to thine owne selfe be true:
Hor. As I doe liue my honourd Lord 'tis true;
King. Oh 'tis true:
Ham. In the secret parts of Fortune? Oh, most true:
Pol. 'Tis most true:
Collected from all Simples that haue Vertue
To make them ranke. Forgiue me this my Vertue,
Ham. You should not haue beleeued me. For vertue
Guil. Faith, her priuates, we
After the Danish Sword, and thy free awe
Oh, that that earth, which kept the world in awe,
No not to stay the grinding of the Axe,
To flaming youth, let Vertue be as waxe.
Guildensterne? Oh, Rosincrane; good Lads: How doe ye
Pol. Ophelia, walke you heere. Gracious so please ye
Go some of ye,
God buy ye.
No, nor the fruitfull Riuer in the Eye,
Thou know'st 'tis common, all that liues must dye,
Burne out the Sence and Vertue of mine eye.
With one Auspicious, and one Dropping eye,
Heere in the cheere and comfort of our eye,
As day do's to your eye.
We shall expresse our dutie in his eye,
And you the Iudges beare a wary eye
Hath turn'd it selfe on me. Loe, heere I lye,
Ouer the nasty Stye
I haue a speech of fire, that faine would blaze,
For Foode and Diet, to some Enterprize
Through your Dominions, for his Enterprize,
Kin. No place indeed should murder Sancturize;
Ham. Buzze, buzze
off.
Enter Hamlet and Horatio a farre off.
My head should be struck off
Queen. Good Hamlet cast thy nightly colour off,
Trumpets sound, and shot goes off.
hold not off
King hold his purpose; I will win for him if I can: if
So prosperously be deliuer'd of.
if not, your pardon, and my returne shall bee the end of
Rosin. How can that be, when you haue the voyce of
call them) that many wearing Rapiers, are affraide of
the time, and outward habite of encounter, a kinde of
Ham. It is but foolery; but it is such a kinde of
Tempest, and (as I say) the Whirle-winde of
Mar. Peace, breake thee of:
Groundlings: who (for the most part) are capeable of
that I know the drossie age dotes on; only got the tune of
ones too, then the length and breadth of a paire of
Ham. It is not strange: for mine Vnckle is King of
the Sconce with a dirty Shouell, and will not tell him of
Guild. Nay, good my Lord, this courtesie is not of
Then flye to others that we know not of.
Would not this Sir, and a Forrest of Feathers, if the rest of
Guild. Oh there ha's beene much throwing about of
you by the rights of our fellowship, by the consonancy of
Sits smiling to my heart; in grace whereof,
Vntill my eielids will no longer wag
There's such Diuinity doth hedge a King,
should be made by the Sonne of a King
Qu. As kill a King?
And can say nothing: No, not for a King,
They cry choose we? Laertes shall be King,
Polon. Goe with me, I will goe seeke the King,
Mar. Is it not like the King?
There is a Play to night to before the King.
Bar. Long liue the King
Wherein Ile catch the Conscience of the King.
Ham. An earnest Coniuration from the King,
Rewards, his Authorities (but such Officers do the King
To lacke discretion. Come, go we to the King,
and go with vs to the King
This is one Lucianus nephew to the King
But soft, but soft, aside; heere comes the King.
Hurts the King.
Ham. Nay I know not, is it the King?
For. Go Captaine, from me greet the Danish King,
Enter King.
Enter King.
Enter King.
Laertes shall be King, Laertes King
Both to my God, one to my gracious King:
to fat vs, and we fat our selfe for Magots. Your fat King,
At least the whisper goes so: Our last King,
Hor. I saw him once; he was a goodly King
Ham. Is this a Prologue, or the Poesie of a Ring?
Enter a King and Queene, very louingly; the Queene embracing
Comes reading
I thinke it was to see my Mothers Wedding
What company, at what expence: and finding
Drugges fit, and Time agreeing:
Confederate season, else, no Creature seeing:
with the body. The King, is a thing-
Ham. Why looke you now, how vnworthy a thing
More Relatiue then this: The Play's the thing,
Horatio tell me one thing
Or is it some abuse? Or no such thing?
fretted with golden fire: why, it appeares no other thing
Hor. And then it started, like a guilty thing
Ducates a peece, for his picture in Little. There is something
Ham. Nothing
And like a Newtrall to his will and matter, did nothing.
Bar. I haue seene nothing
With Formes, to his Conceit? And all for nothing?
Ham. Why then 'tis none to you; for there is nothing
That carry but halfe sense: Her speech is nothing,
As one in suffering all, that suffers nothing.
Euen in their promise, as it is a making;
he sings at Graue-making?
Ham. This man shall set me packing:
As 'twere a thing a little soil'd i'th' working:
That shall not be my Offer, not thy Asking?
When thou liest howling?
Poysoner, with some two or three Mutes comes in againe, seeming
To censure of his seeming
Withdraw, I heare him coming.
Ham. Vpon the talke of the poysoning?
Awake the God of Day: and at his warning,
Players. Mark it, you say right Sir: for a Monday morning
His silence will sit drooping
A Challice for the nonce; whereon but sipping,
Gho. Pitty me not, but lend thy serious hearing
The eares are senselesse that should giue vs hearing,
Polon. I, or drinking, fencing, swearing,
The Canker Galls, the Infants of the Spring
Fran. Not a Mouse stirring
Ham. That Scull had a tongue in it, and could sing
Now for our selfe, and for this time of meeting
And sodainely contriue the meanes of meeting
Ham. Sir, in my heart there was a kinde of fighting,
And more aboue hath his soliciting,
A broken voyce, and his whole Function suiting
Froward, not permanent; sweet not lasting
highly (not to speake it prophanely) that neyther hauing
And sure I am, two men there are not liuing,
Most generous, and free from all contriuing,
Reason? how infinite in faculty? in forme and mouing
When I had seene this hot loue on the wing,
If he steale ought the whil'st this Play is Playing,
Ham. Now might I do it pat, now he is praying,
if I could see the Puppets dallying
when he needes what you haue glean'd, it is but squeezing
Qu. Alas sweet Lady: what imports this Song?
Pol. This is too long
The Bird of Dawning singeth all night long:
Ham. Very like, very like: staid it long?
Therefore I haue intreated him along
Ham. Giue me your pardon Sir, I'ue done you wrong,
Qu. What haue I done, that thou dar'st wag thy tong,
Beleeue so much in him, that he is young,
vs not: let the gall'd iade winch: our withers are vnrung.
In going backe to Schoole in Wittenberg,
I prythee stay with vs, go not to Wittenberg
Ham. Hearke you Guildensterne, and you too: at each
And thus doe we of wisedome and of reach
And cleaue the generall eare with horrid speech:
Do not it selfe vnkennell in one speech,
come, a passionate speech
Ophe. And hath giuen countenance to his speech,
Strengthen your patience in our last nights speech,
need study a speech of some dosen or sixteene lines, which
My Vertue or my Plague, be it either which,
Ile rent him to the quicke: If he but blench
I'ue seene my selfe, and seru'd against the French,
against the which he impon'd as I take it, sixe French
Claimes the conueyance of a promis'd March
If ought of woe, or wonder, cease your search
Appeares before them, and with sollemne march
And now no soyle nor cautell doth besmerch
Laer. To cut his throat i'th' Church
And I with them the third Night kept the Watch,
(Marcellus and Barnardo) on their Watch
With Martiall stalke, hath he gone by our Watch
Why this same strict and most obseruant Watch,
Repugnant to command: vnequall match,
Out of his subiect: and we heere dispatch
I your Commission will forthwith dispatch,
Qu. But looke where sadly the poore wretch
hath caught me in his clutch:
A basenesse to write faire; and laboured much
had spoke my Lines: Nor do not saw the Ayre too much
The Sun no sooner shall the Mountaines touch,
Without the sensible and true auouch
them shape, or time to acte them in. What should such
might be my Lord such a one, that prais'd my Lord such
as if I had neuer beene such
to set on some quantitie of barren Spectators to laugh
them. For there be of them, that will themselues laugh,
Ham. I haue heard of your pratlings too wel enough.
The chariest Maid is Prodigall enough,
yesty collection, which carries them through & through
That swift as Quick-siluer, it courses through
Sir though I am not Spleenatiue, and rash,
Stoopes to his Bace, and with a hideous crash
And from her faire and vnpolluted flesh,
cannot so innocculate our old stocke, but we shall rellish
other Lords attendant with his Guard carrying Torches. Danish
a Flourish.
As loue betweene them, as the Palme should flourish,
And for your part Ophelia, I do wish
Like sweet Bels iangled out of tune, and harsh,
Wee'l put the matter to the present push:
Wards, and Dungeons; Denmarke being one o'th'
For. His quarry cries on hauocke. Oh proud death,
It may be death
He should the bearers put to sodaine death,
Vnder the Moone, can saue the thing from death,
Why thy Canoniz'd bones Hearsed in death,
(For which, they say, you Spirits oft walke in death)
But that the dread of something after death,
He neuer gaue command'ment for their death.
Oh wretched state! Oh bosome, blacke as death!
That I am guiltlesse of your Fathers death,
With pestilent Speeches of his Fathers death,
Which I haue told thee, of my Fathers death.
Or thinking by our late deere Brothers death,
King. Though yet of Hamlet our deere Brothers death
Giues me superfluous death.
Had I but time (as this fell Sergeant death
To muddy death
Is by a forged processe of my death
Nor windy suspiration of forc'd breath,
Qu. Be thou assur'd, if words be made of breath,
Qu. He's fat, and scant of breath.
And for his death no winde of blame shall breath,
And breath of life: I haue no life to breath
The King shal drinke to Hamlets better breath,
Ham. 'Tis ee'n so; the hand of little Imployment hath
That I shall liue and tell him to his teeth;
Then I to Hercules. Within a Moneth?
Alexander died: Alexander was buried: Alexander returneth
These Foyles haue all a length.
Osr. Nay, in good faith, for mine ease in good faith:
Mar. Nor I my Lord: in faith
Laer. How came he dead? Ile not be Iuggel'd with.
Queene with
Tell him his prankes haue been too broad to beare with,
Qu. 'Twere good she were spoken with,
Enter King, Queene, Laertes and Lords, with other Attendants with
Play. I hope we haue reform'd that indifferently with
By what is fed on; and yet within a month?
both?
Giuing more light then heate; extinct in both,
both in reputation and profit was better both
I haue seene you both:
I cannot deeme of. I intreat you both,
Which are to claime, my vantage doth
Visit her face too roughly. Heauen and Earth
Fellowes as I do, crawling betweene Heauen and Earth.
Extorted Treasure in the wombe of Earth,
The Cannons to the Heauens, the Heauen to Earth,
Cry to be heard, as 'twere from Heauen to Earth,
i'th' earth?
Laer. Lay her i'th' earth,
Rosin. As the indifferent Children of the earth
This must be so. We pray you throw to earth
For hee himselfe is subiect to his Birth:
I would not, in plaine tearmes, from this time forth,
Holding a weake supposall of our worth;
The Hand more instrumentall to the Mouth,
And in the Morne and liquid dew of Youth,
And from his mouth
Hor. Not from his mouth,
Make Ossa like a wart. Nay, and thou'lt mouth,
Rankly abus'd: But know thou Noble youth,
That vnmatch'd Forme and Feature of blowne youth,
he is farre gone, farre gone: and truly in my youth,
What is betweene you, giue me vp the truth?
Your bait of falshood, takes this Cape of truth;
Ham. And smelt so? Puh
To be a preparation 'gainst the Poleak:
So leuied as before, against the Poleak:
King. I do beleeue you. Think what now you speak:
If he by chance escape your venom'd stuck,
Or my deere Maiestie your Queene heere, think,
Pol. I wold faine proue so. But what might you think?
Couch we a while, and mark
Ophe. Where is the beauteous Maiesty of Denmark
to't like French Faulconers, flie at any thing we see: wee'l
King. Now must your conscience my acquittance seal,
how expresse and admirable? in Action, how like an Angel?
Ham. Of nothing: bring me to him, hide Fox, and all
Barn. Last night of all,
cannot keepe counsell, they'l tell all
Ham. He was a man, take him for all in all:
His Liberty is full of threats to all,
The better to beguile. This is for all:
Thus Conscience does make Cowards of vs all,
And so, without more circumstance at all,
(Vnlesse things mortall moue them not at all)
Or not at all.
Pol. Madam, I sweare I vse no Art at all:
And bid me hold my peace. I pray you all,
But I am Pigeon-Liuer'd, and lacke Gall
Ophe. You must sing downe a-downe, and you call
We do it wrong, being so Maiesticall
And where th' offence is, let the great Axe fall.
To be fore-stalled ere we come to fall,
And neuer did the Cyclops hammers fall
Vnder the which he shall not choose but fall;
And let me wring your heart, for so I shall
But byrlady he must builde Churches then: or else shall
That you at such time seeing me, neuer shall
Knight shal vse his Foyle and Target: the Louer shall
King. So you shall:
As ere my Conuersation coap'd withall
Then the maine voyce of Denmarke goes withall.
Ham. Not a whit, we defie Augury; there's a speciall
And for your Rapier most especiall,
my Fortunes turne Turke with me; with two Prouinciall
Of Bell and Buriall
out of Christian Buriall
buriall
His meanes of death, his obscure buriall;
Amb. The sight is dismall,
Hor. My Lord, I came to see your Fathers Funerall
Comedie, Historie, Pastorall:
Tragicall-Historicall: Tragicall-Comicall-Historicall-Pastorall:
Pastoricall-Comicall-Historicall-Pastorall:
But this most foule, strange, and vnnaturall
Let me be cruell, not vnnaturall,
Looke where he goes euen now out at the Portall.
Hor. If your minde dislike any thing, obey. I will forestall
in tryall
What feast is toward in thine eternall Cell.
Prompted to my Reuenge by Heauen, and Hell,
Bring with thee ayres from Heauen, or blasts from Hell,
O Shame! where is thy Blush? Rebellious Hell,
As if he had been loosed out of hell,
like a Camell
And beare it to the Chappell
With variable Obiects, shall expell
might they not stopp a Beere-barrell?
But the great Cannon to the Clowds shall tell,
Other. Marry, now I can tell
Other. Masse, I cannot tell.
Let me not burst in Ignorance; but tell
To hell Allegeance: Vowes, to the blackest diuell.
Ham. I humbly thanke you: well, well, well
All may be well.
Ham. This likes me well,
I will requite your loues; so fare ye well:
The which he loued passing well
that I loue passing well
And for my meanes, Ile husband them so well,
Laer. Farewell Ophelia, and remember well
I will bestow him, and will answer well
King. It likes vs well:
Our indiscretion sometimes serues vs well,
My Fathers Spirit in Armes? All is not well:
Ham. Thou prai'st not well,
Polon. And in part him, but you may say not well;
Ham. That's two of his weapons; but well
Ham. I am glad to see you well:
Polon. God buy you; fare you well
Qu. Did he receiue you well?
I haue much to tell thee, Farewell.
play the Foole no way, but in's owne house. Farewell
Polon. Farewell:
Laer. Farewell.
Laer. My necessaries are imbark't; Farewell:
Ham. Your loue, as mine to you: farewell.
Thou wretched, rash, intruding foole farewell,
Queene. Sweets, to the sweet farewell.
King. We doubt it nothing, heartily farewell.
make of them. To a Nunnery go, and quickly too. Farwell
Polon. It is back'd like a Weazell
Ham. Me thinkes it is like a Weazell
Walkes o're the dew of yon high Easterne Hill,
As Reason panders Will
King. Let him demand his fill
New lighted on a heauen-kissing hill:
We must with all our Maiesty and Skill
of hermony, I haue not the skill
that this goodly frame the Earth, seemes to me a sterrill
A silence in the Heauens, the Racke stand still,
Let it bee treble in your silence still:
Let my disclaiming from a purpos'd euill,
In further euill
will
Ham. I will
To shew vs so much Gentrie, and good will,
No Traueller returnes, Puzels the will,
Al. We will, we will
Hor. What is't my Lord? we will
Rough-hew them how we will
Though inclination be as sharpe as will:
Indentures? the very Conueyances of his Lands will
Hor. I warrant you it will
Make choice of whom your wisest Friends you will,
plaid on, then a Pipe? Call me what Instrument you will,
And thy best graces spend it at thy will:
With iuyce of cursed Hebenon in a Violl,
is a sore Decayer of your horson dead body. Heres a Scull
Flaggon of Renish on my head once. This same Scull
That we are made of stuffe, so flat, and dull,
Of vnimproued Mettle, hot and full,
Our Soueraigne Processe, which imports at full
my Mother had not borne me. I am very prowd, reuengefull,
Pol. Good Madam stay awhile, I will be faithfull.
ouer-done, or come tardie off, though it make the vnskilfull
Ham. Oh wonderfull!
As we haue warrantie, her death was doubtfull,
Go, Farewell. Or if thou wilt needs Marry, marry a fool:
Pol. I did enact Iulius Caesar, I was kill'd i'th' Capitol:
Ham. Good Madam
Ham. I dare not drinke yet Madam,
Obey you Madam
Now falles on Priam.
Ham. What are they Children? Who maintains 'em?
And not where I had arm'd them
They were giuen me by Claudio, he receiu'd them
Which as her winkes, and nods, and gestures yeeld them,
You must translate; Tis fit we vnderstand them.
deserue, the more merit is in your bountie. Take them
King. Laertes you shall heare them:
I pray you now, receiue them
and Guildensterne, hold their course for England. Of them
But our cold Maids doe Dead Mens Fingers call them:
Doe you beleeue his tenders, as you call them?
Will you two helpe to hasten them?
King. From Hamlet? Who brought them?
To him from whom you brought them.
Scene indiuidible: or Poem
And from his Mother Clossets hath he drag'd him.
(For so this side of our knowne world esteem'd him)
And that he cals for drinke; Ile haue prepar'd him
We ore-wrought on the way: of these we told him,
No more to vndertake it; I will worke him
Is the great loue the generall gender beare him,
Qu. For loue of God forbeare him
That is not Passions Slaue, and I will weare him
This night to play before him
Ophe. O heauenly Powers, restore him
Hor. Heauen secure him
Hora. I did verie well note him.
I will leaue him,
And will not let beleefe take hold of him
Hor. A peece of him
Take you as 'twere some distant knowledge of him,
Ham. I sir, what of him?
To shew his Greefes: let her be round with him,
Pray you be round with him
That being of so young dayes brought vp with him:
Your sodaine comming ore to play with him;
We cannot get from him
That we with wisest sorrow thinke on him,
And thus awhile the fit will worke on him:
Must I remember: why she would hang on him,
You must not put another scandall on him,
Addicted so and so; and there put on him
Yet must not we put the strong Law on him:
Kin. I pray you good Horatio wait vpon him,
This Spirit dumbe to vs, will speake to him:
Looke you lay home to him,
Pleasant and helpfull to him.
Pol. At such a time Ile loose my Daughter to him,
To our most valiant Brother. So much for him.
Speake lowdly for him.
Reynol. My Lord that would dishonour him
1.Player. Anon he findes him,
Denmarke, and those that would make mowes at him
Let his Queene Mother all alone intreat him
More then his Fathers death, that thus hath put him
to signifie this to his Doctor: for for me to put him
Mar. Nay, let's follow him.
Qu. But not by him
Mar. Let's follow; 'tis not fit thus to obey him
conuocation of wormes are e'ne at him. Your worm
Th' vnnerued Father fals. Then senselesse Illium,
iudgement in such matters, cried in the top of mine) an
an Act: and an Act hath three branches. It is an
Holds such an enmity with bloud of Man,
Rosin. To thinke, my Lord, if you delight not in Man,
the accent of Christians, nor the gate of Christian, Pagan,
And like the kinde Life-rend'ring Politician,
drowne or hang themselues, more then their euen Christian.
straight, the Crowner hath sate on her, and finds it Christian
To giue the world assurance of a man.
Ham. Then I would you were so honest a man
Ham. Horatio, thou art eene as iust a man
The vnseene good old man
Since not th' exterior, nor the inward man
For the Apparell oft proclaimes the man.
Ham. Gods bodykins man, better. Vse euerie man
Speake man
To sound what stop she please. Giue me that man,
Thou canst not then be false to any man.
Other. Was he a Gentleman?
Rosin. Most like a Gentleman
But pardon't as you are a Gentleman.
At friend, or so, and Gentleman
He closes with you thus. I know the Gentleman,
Like a good Childe, and a true Gentleman.
Good sir, or so, or friend, or Gentleman.
gain-giuing as would perhaps trouble a woman
Let me not thinke on't: Frailty, thy name is woman.
Oh most pernicious woman!
Kin. A Norman
Exit Fran.
Mar. Shall I strike at it with my Partizan?
Fie on't? Oh fie, fie, 'tis an vnweeded Garden
Exit King & Queen.
1.Play. But who, O who, had seen the inobled Queen
your death, you were better haue a bad Epitaph, then
King. Will you know them then
Ham. What woman then?
But if the Gods themselues did see her then,
Be you and I behinde an Arras then,
Oh heauie burthen!
dull Asse will not mend his pace with beating; and when
Byrlady your Ladiship is neerer Heauen then when
Ophe. Pray you let's haue no words of this: but when
And with such maimed rites? This doth betoken,
thought some of Natures Iouerney-men had made men,
the onely men
Queene. Amen.
To heare him so inclin'd. Good Gentlemen,
Still am I cal'd? Vnhand me Gentlemen:
Hor. Two nights together, had these Gentlemen
Vpon the witnesse of these Gentlemen,
Ham. Rest, rest perturbed Spirit: so Gentlemen,
Come hither Gentlemen,
Come, my Spade; there is no ancient Gentlemen,
Pol. Well be with you Gentlemen
Or lose your Heart; or your chast Treasure open
On plots, and errors happen
man: I am most dreadfully attended; but in the beaten
And how his Audit stands, who knowes, saue Heauen:
Polon. With what, in the name of Heauen?
Though Lewdnesse court it in a shape of Heauen:
And boule the round Naue downe the hill of Heauen,
My Lord, with all the vowes of Heauen
Would haue made milche the Burning eyes of Heauen,
Had made his course t' illume that part of Heauen
Ham. Oh Heauen!
Infects vnseene. Confesse your selfe to Heauen,
And now Ile doo't, and so he goes to Heauen,
It shewes a will most incorrect to Heauen,
Take it to heart? Fye, 'tis a fault to Heauen,
Shew me the steepe and thorny way to Heauen;
As oft as any passion vnder Heauen,
Then trip him, that his heeles may kicke at Heauen,
Hor. Not I, my Lord, by Heauen
Vnmixt with baser matter; yes yes, by Heauen:
That he might not beteene the windes of heauen
Would I had met my dearest foe in heauen,
Against thy Mother ought; leaue her to heauen,
Oh my offence is ranke, it smels to heauen,
But neerer the offence: to beare all smooth, and euen,
in
Clo. How can that be, vnlesse she drowned her selfe in
What a piece of worke is a man! how Noble in
Hor. Let them come in,
A noise within. Let her come in.
In ill breeding minds. Let her come in.
All. No, let's come in
best seruice in the end. He keepes them like an Ape in
Of entrance to a quarrell: but being in
This bodilesse Creation extasie is very cunning in
King. Thy selfe do grace to them, and bring them in.
vnlesse the Poet and the Player went to Cuffes in
Rosin. Euen those you were wont to take delight in
not sigh gratis, the humorous man shall end his part in
Ham. Vp from my Cabin
To his Confine. And of the truth heerein,
Now the King drinkes to Hamlet. Come, begin,
And as the world were now but to begin,
I stand in pause where I shall first begin,
A Noise within.
Whil'st ranke Corruption mining all within,
March afarre off, and shout within.
King. Our Sonne shall win
Such was the very Armour he had on,
Qu. Alacke I had forgot: 'Tis so concluded on
Giue vs the Foyles: Come on
Laer. Say you so? Come on.
Giue him a further edge, and driue his purpose on
To put an Anticke disposition on:)
That often Madnesse hits on,
For he was likely, had he beene put on
For. Go safely on.
And bow them to your gracious leaue and pardon
And be not from his reason falne thereon;
hands, come: The appurtenance of Welcome, is Fashion
In honourable fashion
Ham. Dost thou thinke Alexander lookt o'this fashion
But in the grosse and scope of my Opinion,
being a good kissing Carrion-
Rosin. To visit you my Lord, no other occasion
Thence to a Lightnesse, and by this declension
to see a robustious Pery-wig-pated Fellow, teare a Passion
But in a Fixion, in a dreame of Passion,
Into a Towring passion
Had he the Motiue and the Cue for passion
owne Succession
When we would bring him on to some Confession
Adams Profession
Messe; 'tis a Chowgh; but as I saw spacious in the possession
Get from him why he puts on this Confusion:
Ile crosse it, though it blast me. Stay Illusion:
And Iemme of all our Nation
This present Obiect made probation
owne. Besides, to be demanded of a Spundge, what replication
That Flesh is heyre too? 'Tis a consummation
Hor. He waxes desperate with imagination
I haue in quicke determination
To shew my duty in your Coronation,
Ham. I will tell you why; so shall my anticipation
admiration?
her into amazement, and admiration
Ghost. Do not forget: this Visitation
No Noble rite, nor formall ostentation,
And they in France of the best ranck and station,
wilfully seekes her owne saluation?
of the late Innouation?
Mar. Looke with what courteous action
And keepe within the reare of your Affection;
Who dipping all his Faults in their affection,
And could of men distinguish, her election
Guild. The Queene your Mother, in most great affliction
and good discretion
According to the Phrase and the Addition,
Why should we in our peeuish Opposition
So horridly to shake our disposition,
Guild. But with much forcing of his disposition
and indeed, it goes so heauenly with my disposition;
That might your nature honour, and exception
the Question
Ham. To be, or not to be, that is the Question:
too, though in the meane time, some necessary Question
But since so iumpe vpon this bloodie question,
By this encompassement and drift of question,
That I must call in question
could hee digge without Armes? Ile put another question
And thus the Natiue hew of Resolution
Complexion
Exit Polon.
For, what we know must be, and is as common
Ham. I Madam, it is common
And why such dayly Cast of Brazon Cannon
his weapon
Ham. What's his weapon?
Hor. Indeed my Lord, it followed hard vpon
Ham. Does it not, thinkst thee, stand me now vpon
Now see that Noble, and most Soueraigne Reason,
(O Heauen! A beast that wants discourse of Reason
Which might depriue your Soueraignty of Reason,
Larded with many seuerall sorts of reason;
shall wee to th' Court: for, by my fey I cannot reason?
All. Treason, Treason
Hor. Indeed I heard it not: then it drawes neere the season,
Ham. Denmark's a Prison
a prison
Let him go Gertrude: Do not feare our person:
Osr. I meane my Lord, the opposition of your person
Ham. If it assume my noble Fathers person,
Cap, we are not the very Button
Ho Guildenstern:
Ham. Not so my Lord, I am too much i'th' Sun
But orderly to end, where I begun,
How ere my happes, my ioyes were ne're begun.
Our Willes and Fates do so contrary run,
set the Table on a Rore? No one now to mock your own
Which haue solicited. The rest is silence. O, o, o, o.
Laer. No
When he is fit and season'd for his passage? No.
Bar. 'Tis now strook twelue, get thee to bed Francisco
Qu. What shall I do?
To let them know both what we meane to do,
My operant Powers my Functions leaue to do:
My sterne effects: then what I haue to do,
Ham. Not this by no meanes that I bid you do:
Enter Polonius, and Reynoldo.
Polon. You shall doe maruels wisely: good Reynoldo,
Polon. Giue him his money, and these notes Reynoldo
And in part him. Doe you marke this Reynoldo?
Fran. Barnardo?
Mar. Holla Barnardo
as they are. To a Nunnery, go.
Madnesse in great Ones, must not vnwatch'd go.
Words without thoughts, neuer to Heauen go.
I do beseech you giue him leaue to go
But let that go
Which bewept to the graue did not go,
Why to a publike count I might not go,
Ham. Nothing but to shew you how a King may go
This Play is the Image of a murder done in Vienna: Gonzago
murther of Gonzago?
Ham. Saw? Who?
Ham. Betweene who?
Manet Hamlet & Horatio.
Ham. What hoa, Horatio?
There are more things in Heauen and Earth, Horatio,
Enter Queene and Horatio.
Enter Hamlet and Horatio
Their grand Commission, where I found Horatio,
Then to say one: but I am very sorry good Horatio,
Ham. To what base vses we may returne Horatio.
Ham. O I dye Horatio:
And what make you from Wittenberg Horatio?
Ham. Let me see. Alas poore Yorick, I knew him Horatio,
Enter Horatio.
Barn. Lookes it not like the King? Marke it Horatio
Mar. Question it Horatio
Mar. Thou art a Scholler; speake to it Horatio
Ere I had euer seene that day Horatio.
Ham. In my minds eye (Horatio)
this Quintessence of Dust? Man delights not me; no,
Ham. His Beard was grisly? no
be not now; yet it will come; the readinesse is all, since no
Ham. How if I answere no?
If't be th' affliction of his loue, or no.
were sent for or no
How are they escorted? Will they pursue the Quality no
Ham. Nor the Soales of her Shoo?
Ham. The point envenom'd too,
Rosin. I that they do my Lord. Hercules & his load too
Hor. Let him blesse thee too
Barn. It would be spoke too
Other. Go too
Polon. I, fashion you may call it, go too, go too
Importing Denmarks health, and Englands too,
Hor. I my Lord, and of Calue-skinnes too
Warlicke appointment gaue vs Chace. Finding our selues too
King. Sweet Gertrude leaue vs too,
King. Faith I must leaue thee Loue, and shortly too:
boorded them: On the instant they got cleare of our Shippe, so
Other. Why 'tis found so
King. It shall be so:
Laer. Let this be so:
Who does it then? His Madnesse? If't be so,
Kin. If it be so Laertes, as how should it be so:
As he would draw it. Long staid he so,
Hor. E'ene so
Ophe. Indeed my Lord, you made me beleeue so
Osr. Shall I redeliuer you ee'n so?
Such deere concernings hide, Who would do so,
Hor. 'Twere to consider: to curiously to consider so
And as my Loue is siz'd, my Feare is so
That I haue possitiuely said, 'tis so,
the Ayre promise-cramm'd, you cannot feed Capons so
I do repent: but heauen hath pleas'd it so,
If damned Custome haue not braz'd it so,
Ham. No by the Rood, not so:
Ophel. No more but so
And let him know so
Polon. I will say so.
to say so
Ham. I would not haue your Enemy say so;
great folke should haue countenance in this world to
Ham. Thy state is the more gracious; for 'tis a vice to
Spade; heere's fine Reuolution, if wee had the tricke to
He hath one twelue for mine, and that would come to
Songs? Your flashes of Merriment that were wont to
O deere Ophelia, I am ill at these Numbers: I haue not Art to
Thy face is valiant since I saw thee last: Com'st thou to
my Mother lookes, and my Father dyed within's two
But two months dead: Nay, not so much; not two,
Ham. Ladie, shall I lye in your Lap?
Ham. I meane, my Head vpon your Lap?
married already, all but one shall liue, the rest shall keep
Hor. Haile to your Lordship
Osr. I commend my duty to your Lordship
Ophe. What meanes your Lordship?
Seeming to feele his blow, with flaming top
Vnpegge the Basket on the houses top:
Ham. As th'art a man, giue me the Cup.
Here's to thy health. Giue him the cup,
You mainly were stirr'd vp?
but Gardiners, Ditchers and Graue-makers; they hold vp
Or pardon'd being downe? Then Ile looke vp,
And Mermaid-like, a while they bore her vp,
Hor. O yes, my Lord, he wore his Beauer vp
A blanket in th' Alarum of feare caught vp.
Be thou familiar; but by no meanes vulgar:
Exit Laer.
Will you doe this, keepe close within your Chamber,
Ophe. My Lord, as I was sowing in my Chamber,
Ham. I beseech you remember
Why may not Imagination trace the Noble dust of Alexander,
Hora. Most like: It harrowes me with fear & wonder
As hush as death: Anon the dreadfull Thunder
King. Pluck them asunder
And but that great Command, o're-swaies the order,
And (as I thinke) they haue already order
Enter one with a Recorder.
Ophe. They bore him bare fac'd on the Beer,
Whether 'tis Nobler in the minde to suffer
Cousen Hamlet, you know the wager
Osr. Rapier and dagger
a Progresse through the guts of a Begger
Hor. A countenance more in sorrow then in anger
Thou find'st to be too busie, is some danger.
That we can let our Beard be shooke with danger,
Enter a Messenger.
Enter a Messenger.
Ham. In heauen, send thither to see. If your Messenger
Exit Messenger
That they are not a Pipe for Fortunes finger.
All. Longer, longer
Ham. Excellent, excellent well: y'are a Fishmonger
yet he knew me not at first; he said I was a Fishmonger:
This must not be: and then, I Precepts gaue her,
Qu. I will not speake with her
Shardes, Flints, and Peebles, should be throwne on her:
Qu. Came this from Hamlet to her
To sing sage Requiem, and such rest to her
Make vp my summe. What wilt thou do for her?
kneeles, and makes shew of Protestation vnto him. He takes her
Ham. Your wisedome should shew it selfe more richer,
Haue burst their cerments, why the Sepulcher
But you must know, your Father lost a Father,
then yours. You are welcome: but my Vnckle Father,
King. Conceit vpon her Father
Beene thus encountred. A figure like your Father,
Kin. Not that I thinke you did not loue your Father,
Hor. My Lord, the King your Father
To giue these mourning duties to your Father:
Requit him for your Father
wayes to a Nunnery. Where's your Father?
The Apparition comes. I knew your Father:
Then is the Throne of Denmarke to thy Father.
My Fathers Brother: but no more like my Father,
Oh thou vilde King, giue me my Father
Play something like the murder of my Father,
Ham. The King my Father?
Most throughly for my Father
Laer. Where's my Father?
My father, me thinkes I see my father
To draw him on to pleasures, and to gather
The Frenchman gaue you, bring you in fine together,
Nay, come let's goe together.
God willing shall not lacke: let vs goe in together,
Go to your rest, at night wee'l Feast together.
Ham. No faith, not a iot. But to follow him thether
Clo. For none neither
Why do's the Drumme come hither?
that she sends you to Prison hither?
For we haue closely sent for Hamlet hither,
Goose-quils, and dare scarse come thither
Ham. So much for this Sir; now let me see the other,
Folded the Writ vp in forme of the other,
Pale as his shirt, his knees knocking each other,
That hath a stomacke in't: which is no other
'Tis meete that some more audience then a Mother,
Ham. A bloody deed, almost as bad good Mother,
'Tis not alone my Inky Cloake (good Mother)
England. Farewell deere Mother
Of my true Mother
Ham. We shall obey, were she ten times our Mother.
And yet to me they are strong. The Queen his Mother,
Good night Mother.
He that hath kil'd my King, and whor'd my Mother,
But would you were not so. You are my Mother
Would quake to looke on. Soft now, to my Mother:
Hiperion to a Satyre: so louing to my Mother,
And hurt my Mother
Follow my Mother.
Ham. within. Mother, mother, mother
Let me see another
God has giuen you one pace, and you make your selfe another:
Ham. Why he, more then another?
As kill a King, and marrie with his Brother
As watchmen to my heart: but good my Brother
Ham. Murther?
Of those effects for which I did the Murther.
Can serue my turne? Forgiue me my foule Murther:
Gho. Reuenge his foule and most vnnaturall Murther
Ham. Where wilt thou lead me? speak; Ile go no further
May giue his saying deed: which is no further,
King. How may we try it further?
Doubt Truth to be a Lier,
Till the last Trumpet. For charitable praier,
Kibe. How long hast thou been a Graue-maker?
more Choller
Guild. No my Lord, rather with choller
Ham. I trulie: for the power of Beautie, will sooner
Laer. Oh terrible woer,
Rosin. Good my Lord, what is your cause of distemper?
The head and sourse of all your Sonnes distemper
Vpon the heate and flame of thy distemper
Ham. At Supper
That they doe know my sonne: Come you more neerer
Winner and Looser
he will keepe out water a great while. And your water,
heere stands the man; good: If the man goe to this water
the Abstracts and breefe Chronicles of the time. After
after.
Giues the tongue vowes: these blazes, Daughter,
You must not take for fire. For this time Daughter,
Pol. Still on my Daughter
Polon. If you call me Iephta my Lord, I haue a daughter
Haue you a daughter?
the false Steward that stole his masters daughter
Betweene him, and my daughter.
Pol. How say you by that? Still harping on my daughter:
Enter.
Enter.
Enter.
Enter.
Enter.
Enter.
Enter.
Enter.
Enter.
Enter.
Enter.
Enter.
Enter.
Within the Center
or a Carpenter?
Mason, the Shipwright, or the Carpenter?
Sir, this same Scull sir, was Yoricks Scull, the Kings Iester
Feare it Ophelia, feare it my deare Sister,
That I must be their Scourge and Minister.
dumbe, yet are they much too light for the bore of the Matter.
Ham. Nay, do not thinke I flatter:
To heare, and see the matter
How now Ophelia, what's the matter?
Ham. Now Mother, what's the matter?
Sir, this is the matter
Let them guard the doore. What is the matter?
Laer. This nothings more then matter
my heart: but it is no matter
I lou'd you euer; but it is no matter:
Say. Hee shall Sir, and't please him. There's a Letter
The Letter.
Reads the Letter.
but yet I could accuse me of such things, that it were better
And your poore Seruant euer
Oh Heart, loose not thy Nature; let not euer
To do obsequious Sorrow. But to perseuer
With an attent eare; till I may deliuer
Truly deliuer
That I haue longed long to re-deliuer.
Other. Nay but heare you Goodman Deluer
you are welcome to Elsonower?
way of friendship, What make you at Elsonower?
Oh wicked Wit, and Gifts, that haue the power
May be the Diuell, and the Diuel hath power
Giuing to you no further personall power
In generall Synod take away her power:
Mar. 'Tis gone, and will not answer
end both at the first and now, was and is, to hold as 'twer
My fault is past. But oh, what forme of Prayer
as many of your Players do, I had as liue the Town-Cryer
vs, Sir
Ham. With drinke Sir?
Laer. You mocke me Sir
Clo. Mine Sir:
Clo. For no man Sir
Ham. I am very glad to see you: good euen Sir.
this Sir?
Very well said. Looke you Sir,
Ham. Heare you Sir:
blesse you Sir.
Say. God blesse you Sir
Rosin. God saue you Sir
do them wrong, to make them exclaim against their
Guild. The King, sir
Ham. Come on sir
Laer. Come on sir.
of Players sir
Ham. I see a Cherube that see's him: but come, for
Clo. It must be Se offendendo, it cannot bee else: for
Rosin. Happily he's the second time come to them: for
Ham. Oh good Horatio, Ile take the Ghosts word for
And all we waile for
play your Clownes, speake no more then is set downe for
Pray loue remember: and there is Paconcies, that's for
That thus he suffers for
Ham. What man dost thou digge it for?
Guil. My Lord, we were sent for
Next your Sonne gone, and he most violent Author
Mother goodnight. Indeede this Counsellor
which your modesties haue not craft enough to color,
Enter Saylor.
Pol. Vpon mine Honor
Till by some elder Masters of knowne Honor,
To my Reuenge. But in my termes of Honor
Player. I warrant your Honor
Which he stood seiz'd on, to the Conqueror:
Actor
to Yaughan, fetch me a stoupe of Liquor.
Where be your Iibes now? Your Gambals? Your
Meane time we thanke you, for your well-tooke Labour.
Of his behauiour
That shew of such an exercise may colour
And since so Neighbour'd to his youth, and humour,
But what is your affaire in Elsenour?
As it behoues my Daughter, and your Honour.
All. Our duty to your Honour.
of her fauour?
Ham. Gentlemen, you are welcom to Elsonower: your
finde him not there, seeke him i'th other place your
with your finger and thumbe, giue it breath with your
High and Mighty, you shall know I am set naked on your
Mes. Letters my Lord from Hamlet, This to your
Clo. Cudgell thy braines no more about it; for your
not Honestie to haue it thus set downe: For you your
Rosin. Without my Lord, guarded to know your
in that. I will speake to this fellow: whose Graue's
his Action of Battery? hum. This fellow might be in's
Ophe. There's Fennell for you, and Columbines: ther's
Clo. 'Twill not be seene in him, there the men are as
if they should grow themselues to common Players (as
With windlesses, and with assaies of Bias,
Tell him that by his license, Fortinbras
that our last King Hamlet o'recame Fortinbras
To the Inheritance of Fortinbras,
His fell to Hamlet. Now sir, young Fortinbras,
To Norway, Vncle of young Fortinbras,
Now followes, that you know young Fortinbras,
Ophe. Well, God dil'd you. They say the Owle was
for you Sir: It comes from th' Ambassadours that was
Whose doe you thinke it was?
Clo. A whoreson mad Fellowes it was;
Ham. I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it was
Himselfe, the Primrose path of dalliance treads,
There on the pendant boughes, her Coronet weeds
Do not for euer with thy veyled lids
It is our tricke, Nature her custome holds,
Vnite comutuall, in most sacred Bands
And termes Compulsatiue, those foresaid Lands
Importing the surrender of those Lands
Did forfeite (with his life) all those his Lands
Ham. So you mistake Husbands.
Since loue our hearts, and Hymen did our hands
Rosin. Niggard of question, but of our demands
There's a Diuinity that shapes our ends,
As low as to the Fiends
Ham. By and by, is easily said. Leaue me Friends:
A worthy Pioner, once more remoue good friends
O'remaster't as you may. And now good friends,
And thus I know his father and his friends,
Come Gertrude, wee'l call vp our wisest friends,
Carue for himselfe; for, on his choyce depends
King. Well, we shall sift him. Welcome good Frends:
Breathing like sanctified and pious bonds,
Abuses me to damne me. Ile haue grounds
And passion in the Gods
Laer. Do you see this, you Gods?
Out, out, thou Strumpet-Fortune, all you Gods,
A man that Fortunes buffets, and Rewards
longer then they can sing? Will they not say afterwards
Lords.
Ile wipe away all triuiall fond Records,
Ham. Words, words, words
Must (like a Whore) vnpacke my heart with words,
More then in words?
Caps, hands, and tongues, applaud it to the clouds,
Keepes on his wonder, keepes himselfe in clouds,
In mincing with his Sword her Husbands limbes,
Like to a murdering Peece in many places,
might be the Pate of a Polititian which this Asse o're Offices:
time a great buyer of Land, with his Statutes, his Recognizances,
But since he is better'd, we haue therefore oddes
And do not spred the Compost on the Weedes,
Rosin. Faith there ha's bene much to do on both sides:
Ham. What is he, whose griefes
Ham. What call you the Carriages?
For like the Hecticke in my blood he rages,
Oh this is Counter you false Danish Dogges.
Ham. 'Tis as easie as lying: gouerne these Ventiges
Ham. A King of shreds and patches.
Your Maiestie, and wee that haue free soules, it touches
King. There's matters in these sighes.
and your leane Begger is but variable seruice to dishes,
And tediousnesse, the limbes and outward flourishes,
Out of his Lunacies
Coach: Goodnight Ladies: Goodnight sweet Ladies:
Ieering? Quite chopfalne? Now get you to my Ladies
Are heere arriued. Giue order that these bodies
Though all the earth orewhelm them to mens eies.
The great man downe, you marke his fauourites flies,
The poore aduanc'd, makes Friends of Enemies:
Laer. None but his Enemies
Some little time: so by your Companies
When sorrowes comes, they come not single spies,
his Fines, his double Vouchers, his Recoueries:
Is this the fine of his Fines, and the recouery of his Recoueries,
And stand a Comma 'tweene their amities,
And he beseech'd me to intreate your Maiesties
Rosin. Both your Maiesties
His further gate heerein. In that the Leuies,
That not your trespasse, but my madnesse speakes:
The very soule, and sweete Religion makes
Vertue it selfe scapes not calumnious stroakes,
That patient merit of the vnworthy takes,
That I in forgery of shapes and trickes,
The Heart-ake, and the thousand Naturall shockes
As from the body of Contraction pluckes
Olde Grandsire Priam seekes
With this affaire along, for all our Thankes.
Your Visitation shall receiue such thankes
Ham. Begger that I am, I am euen poore in thankes;
Where should we haue our thankes?
Qu. The Lady protests to much me thinkes
sent for; and there is a kinde confession in your lookes;
Before mine Vnkle. Ile obserue his lookes,
Conceit in weakest bodies, strongest workes.
Did coldly furnish forth the Marriage Tables;
Or to take Armes against a Sea of troubles,
Keepes wassels and the swaggering vpspring reeles,
Rebellious to his Arme, lyes where it falles
Are mortiz'd and adioyn'd: which when it falles,
And in his brainish apprehension killes
Ham. These tedious old fooles
Of Crow-flowers, Nettles, Daysies, and long Purples,
As to peace-parted Soules
With thoughts beyond thee; reaches of our Soules,
Foyles,
I haue bad dreames
When I to sulphurous and tormenting Flames
Ham. Seemes Madam? Nay, it is: I know not Seemes:
Hauing euer seene. In the prenominate crimes,
For in the fatnesse of this pursie times,
man ha's ought of what he leaues. What is't to leaue betimes?
Pol. You know sometimes
Laer. That drop of blood, that calmes
'Tis dangerous, when the baser nature comes
Some sayes, that euer 'gainst that Season comes
I stay too long; but here my Father comes:
Hor. Looke my Lord, it comes
The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose Sable Armes
Clo. He was the first that euer bore Armes
La. To his good Friends, thus wide Ile ope my Armes:
Till I haue caught her once more in mine armes:
A Sister driuen into desperate tearmes,
Ham. Why ee'n so: and now my Lady Wormes,
meanes
Weigh what conuenience both of time and meanes
As checking at his Voyage, and that he meanes
Rosin. I thinke their Inhibition comes by the meanes
Hor. No, by no meanes
Ham. Marry this is Miching Malicho, that meanes
Ham. Being thus benetted round with Villaines,
Mad let vs grant him then: and now remaines
Braines
Ere I could make a Prologue to my braines,
For. Let foure Captaines
Ham. A goodly one, in which there are many Confines,
About her lanke and all ore-teamed Loines,
Ham. Is not Parchment made of Sheep-skinnes?
With blood of Fathers, Mothers, Daughters, Sonnes,
No Trophee, Sword, nor Hatchment o're his bones,
If thou canst mutine in a Matrons bones,
His forme and cause conioyn'd, preaching to stones,
The insolence of Office, and the Spurnes
Which time she chaunted snatches of old tunes,
Guild. Happy, in that we are not ouer-happy: on Fortunes
Enter two Clownes.
and drowne himselfe; it is will he nill he, he goes;
Sleepes
Popt in betweene th' election and my hopes,
Looke you, these are the stoppes
These words like Daggers enter in mine eares.
And let vs once againe assaile your eares,
Powres the poyson in his eares.
Ere yet the salt of most vnrighteous Teares
Hor. She speakes much of her Father; saies she heares
Who Impotent and Bedrid, scarsely heares
That I haue? He would drowne the Stage with teares,
heere, man and Boy thirty yeares
Ham. On him, on him: look you how pale he glares,
Make thy two eyes like Starres, start from their Spheres,
Volt. Most faire returne of Greetings, and Desires.
Houres
For she may strew dangerous coniectures
With true-loue showres
Ophe. The King rises
Guil. Heauens make our presence and our practises
King. So is it, if thou knew'st our purposes
it might be Hangers till then; but on sixe Barbary Horses
Osr. The sir King ha's wag'd with him six Barbary horses,
And let him for a paire of reechie kisses,
shewes a most pittifull Ambition in the Foole that vses
Why you proceeded not against these feates,
I should haue fatted all the Region Kites
Yet heere she is allowed her Virgin Rites,
My Tongue and Soule in this be Hypocrites.
Of mighty opposites
So fast they'l follow: your Sister's drown'd Laertes
King. Oh he is mad Laertes,
Enter King and Laertes.
King. Good Laertes:
Reuenge should haue no bounds: but good Laertes
Qu. Calmely good Laertes
Acts little of his will. Tell me Laertes,
King. What is the cause Laertes,
What would'st thou haue Laertes?
And loose your voyce. What would'st thou beg Laertes,
And when he's not himselfe, do's wrong Laertes,
Noise within. Enter Laertes.
You told vs of some suite. What is't Laertes?
Osr. How is't Laertes?
But meere implorators of vnholy Sutes,
Shark'd vp a List of Landlesse Resolutes,
These profound heaues
Into the Madnesse whereon now he raues,
heere lies the point; If I drowne my selfe wittingly, it argues
Together with remembrance of our selues.
Qu. No, nothing but our selues
After the thing it loues
Of Hamlets wildenesse: so shall I hope your Vertues
Hath op'd his ponderous and Marble iawes,
King. Thou still hast bin the father of good Newes
How now? What Newes?
she is a Strumpet. What's the newes?
That suck'd the Honie of his Musicke Vowes:
and out-stretcht Heroes the Beggers Shadowes:
Clo. I like thy wit well in good faith, the Gallowes
built stronger then the Church: Argall, the Gallowes
This was your Husband. Looke you now what followes.
This presence knowes,
Mar. Good now sit downe, & tell me he that knowes
Heere's a Napkin, rub thy browes,
Conuert his Gyues to Graces. So that my Arrowes
And makes a blister there. Makes marriage vowes
In thewes and Bulke: but as his Temple waxes,
Dyes
Dyes.
King Dyes.
This Physicke but prolongs thy sickly dayes.
As Hell, whereto it goes. My Mother stayes,
wayes
Looke too't, I charge you; come your wayes
Had left the flushing of her gauled eyes,
By their opprest and feare-surprized eyes,
Of mine owne eyes
Who like not in their iudgement, but their eyes:
He seem'd to finde his way without his eyes,
Blasting his wholsom breath. Haue you eyes?
And batten on this Moore? Ha? Haue you eyes?
On Fortinbras, which he (in breefe) obeyes,
Th' extrauagant, and erring Spirit, hyes
There is no shuffling, there the Action lyes
Ham. That's a faire thought to ly betweene Maids legs
be Lord of Beasts, and his Crib shall stand at the Kings
Richer then that, which foure successiue Kings
Of your precedent Lord. A vice of Kings,
Sings.
To whose huge Spoakes, ten thousand lesser things
And leads the will to desperate Vndertakings,
Wee'l make a solemne wager on your commings,
Oh this is the poyson of deepe greefe, it springs
Saue me; and houer o're me with your wings
If with too credent eare you list his Songs;
peace: the Clowne shall make those laugh whose lungs
Ham. Then are our Beggers bodies; and our Monarchs
for Ile haue a suite of Sables. Oh Heauens! dye two moneths
Ham. I, but while the grasse growes, the Prouerbe is
Ham. No, beleeue mee 'tis very cold, the winde is
hee is.
What Maiestie should be, what Dutie is,
To my sicke soule (as sinnes true Nature is)
Ham. Then is Doomesday neere: But your newes is
that doe ill: now, thou dost ill to say the Gallowes is
him a-downe-a. Oh, how the wheele becomes it? It is
world, the Parragon of Animals; and yet to me, what is
And bring the Gentlemen where Hamlet is
And what so poore a man as Hamlet is,
either good or bad, but thinking makes it so: to me it is
Most holie and Religious feare it is
Ghost. Murther most foule, as in the best it is;
to know it is.
Rosin. My Lord, you must tell vs where the body is,
Ham. He poysons him i'th' Garden for's estate: His
Ham. I sir, that sokes vp the Kings Countenance, his
Ham. He that playes the King shall be welcome; his
Scull of a Lawyer? where be his Quiddits now? his
takes off his
If one could match you Sir. This report of his
to haue his fine Pate full of fine Dirt? will his
Hor. This Lapwing runs away with the shell on his
Clo. Why, because he was mad; hee shall recouer his
comes so neere the heeles of our Courtier, hee galls his
accepts his
Ham. This?
In eare and eare. O my deere Gertrude, this,
Bodie of the Time, his forme and pressure. Now, this
sweet Lord: how dost thou, good Lord? this
Polon. And then Sir does he this?
Qu. To who do you speake this?
As deepe as to the Lungs? Who does me this?
Polon. Wherefore should you doe this?
To make Oppression bitter, or ere this,
And let vs heare Barnardo speake of this
Kin. Let's further thinke of this,
As I do thee. Something too much of this.
Now out of this
Your lonelinesse. We are oft too blame in this,
Into the Chappell. I pray you hast in this.
Ham. Looke heere vpon this Picture, and on this,
Chamber, and tell her, let her paint an inch thicke, to this
Possesse it meerely. That it should come to this:
So excellent a King, that was to this
Take vp the body; Such a sight as this
Ham. But where was this?
Qu. Oh what a rash, and bloody deed is this?
What warlike noyse is this?
Qu. Alacke, what noyse is this?
Hor. Why, what a King is this?
King. Do you thinke 'tis this?
Graue, to tell vs this
Thine euermore most deere Lady, whilst this
Laer. Why aske you this?
they aske you what it meanes, say you this:
King. What dost thou meane by this?
Becomes the Field, but heere shewes much amis.
Enquire me first what Danskers are in Paris;
beard me in Denmarke? What, my yong Lady and Mistris?
Rosin. Why then your Ambition makes it one: 'tis
Enter King, Queene, Rosincrane, and Guildensterne Cum alijs.
to Dido, and thereabout of it especially, where he speaks
but I thanke you: and sure deare friends my thanks
Affront Ophelia. Her Father, and my selfe (lawful espials)
Ham. Oh all you host of Heauen! Oh Earth; what els?
Enter Barnardo and Francisco two Centinels.
Admit no Messengers, receiue no Tokens:
Is there not Raine enough in the sweet Heauens
Ophe. O helpe him, you sweet Heauens
To cast beyond our selues in our Opinions,
Is the maine Motiue of our Preparations,
They haue proclaim'd their Malefactions.
King. O for two speciall Reasons,
Chaplesse, and knockt about the Mazard with a Sextons
The faire Ophelia? Nimph, in thy Orizons
T' assume a pleasing shape, yea and perhaps
Clowne sings. But Age with his stealing steps
But Sir, such wanton, wild, and vsuall slips,
Giue me the Cups,
now: this Scul, has laine in the earth three & twenty years
Ophe. He hath my Lord of late, made many tenders
Qu. Aye me; what act, that roares so lowd, & thunders
Ham. Oh, ha? Come some Musick. Come y Recorders:
Osr. The Carriages Sir, are the hangers
Or padling in your necke with his damn'd Fingers,
Mother. But is there no sequell at the heeles of this Mothers
Ham. I lou'd Ophelia; fortie thousand Brothers
The counterfet presentment of two Brothers:
And for the day confin'd to fast in Fiers,
As you are Friends, Schollers and Soldiers,
And his Commission to imploy those Soldiers
In scuffling they change Rapiers.
Doe not beleeue his vowes; for they are Broakers,
Ham. So I do still, by these pickers and stealers
Thicke and vnwholsome in their thoughts, and whispers
Of accidentall iudgements, casuall slaughters
it is most like if their meanes are not better) their Writers
Hoboyes play. The dumbe shew enters.
And keepe a Farme and Carters
Ham. Do you thinke I meant Country matters?
Fellowes some meanes to the King: They haue Letters
Come, I will giue you way for these your Letters,
of Flowers.
Ophe. Larded with sweet Flowers:
a whole Theater of Others. Oh, there bee Players
Ham. We shall know by these Fellowes: the Players
Guil. There are the Players
Enter Hamlet, and two or three of the Players.
Flourish for the Players.
Rosin. Madam, it so fell out, that certaine Players
With most myraculous Organ. Ile haue these Players,
Enter foure or fiue Players.
freely; or the blanke Verse shall halt for't: what Players
Exit Players.
King. Where are my Switzers?
Pol. Come sirs.
Pol. Giue first admittance to th' Ambassadors,
To both your Honors
Our Crowne, our Life, and all that we call Ours
Enter Fortinbras and English Ambassador, with Drumme, Colours,
to mee, then a foule and pestilent congregation of vapours.
Laer. For Hamlet, and the trifling of his fauours,
The Portraiture of his; Ile count his fauours:
Ophe. My Lord, I haue Remembrances of yours,
Clo. You lye out on't Sir, and therefore it is not yours:
Exit Ambass.
Ham. Thrift thrift Horatio: the Funerall Bakt-meats
Of carnall, bloudie, and vnnaturall acts,
With such dexterity to Incestuous sheets:
Bak'd and impasted with the parching streets,
With witchcraft of his wits, hath Traitorous guifts.
All. Lights, Lights, Lights.
But I do prophesie th' election lights
To these delights
Ham. Why did you laugh, when I said, Man delights
Thoughts
thoughts
And botch the words vp fit to their owne thoughts,
Free me so farre in your most generous thoughts,
not, Ile gaine nothing but my shame, and the odde hits
you and him, hee shall not exceed you three hits;
As he is very potent with such Spirits,
That no Reuennew hast, but thy good spirits
But looke, Amazement on thy Mother sits;
Oh Heauens, is't possible, a yong Maids wits,
Clo. Faith e'ene with loosing his wits
Euen to the teeth and forehead of our faults,
Attendants.
thousand Tenants
Your bedded haire, like life in excrements,
That on the view and know of these Contents,
Betweene the passe, and fell incensed points
And there I see such blacke and grained spots,
Without the which we are Pictures, or meere Beasts.
That Spirit, vpon whose spirit depends and rests
To giue in euidence. What then? What rests?
Was falsely borne in hand, sends out Arrests
out of his swathing clouts
Actus Secundus.
With eyes like Carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus
th'Hyrcanian Beast. It is not so: it begins with Pyrrhus
What is the reason that you vse me thus?
it could not moue thus
Whereon his Braines still beating, puts him thus
King. How long hath she bin thus?
with modestie enough, & likeliehood to lead it; as thus.
Enter Polonius, Voltumand, and Cornelius.
Enter Voltemand and Cornelius.
Exit Voltemand and Cornelius.
What sayes Pollonius?
Polonius,
Enter King, and Polonius.
Enter Queene and Polonius.
Exit Hamlet tugging in Polonius.
Enter Polonius.
Enter Polonius.
Enter Polonius.
Enter Polonius.
Enter Polonius.
King. Now Hamlet, where's Polonius?
Killes Polonius
King. Where is Polonius
Exit Polonius.
Marcellus
Enter Hamlet, Horatio, Marcellus.
Enter Horatio, Barnardo, and Marcellus.
Enter Horatio and Marcellus.
Enter Horatio and Marcellus.
Bar. Welcome Horatio, welcome good Marcellus
Speake of it. Stay, and speake. Stop it Marcellus
Enter Lucianus.
Haue of your audience beene most free and bounteous.
of the Play be then to be considered: that's Villanous, &
Ham. Heere thou incestuous, murdrous,
Yet haue I something in me dangerous,
Maiesty shall haue Tribute of mee: the aduenturous
Ouer his Kingdome. You know the Rendeuous:
Of blew Olympus
vnlimited. Seneca cannot be too heauy, nor Plautus
Ham. Angels and Ministers of Grace defend vs:
For your desire to know what is betweene vs,
King. Bring him before vs
Both. We will haste vs.
Leaue vs.
This vnpreuayling woe, and thinke of vs
Touching this dreaded sight, twice seene of vs,
Might by the Soueraigne power you haue of vs,
When our deare plots do paule, and that should teach vs,
Haue you any further Trade with vs?
King. I like him not, nor stands it safe with vs,
If that his Maiesty would ought with vs,
Whose Image euen but now appear'd to vs,
Be you content to lend your patience to vs,
King. I do not thinke't
Let go, by Heauen Ile haue't.
in't?
Ham. Who is to be buried in't?
That ha's no rellish of Saluation in't,
Ham. I thinke it be thine indeed: for thou liest in't
on't
What thinke you on't?
From fashion of himselfe. What thinke you on't?
It hath the primall eldest curse vpon't,
It is; Adue, Adue, Remember me: I haue sworn't
Clo. Too't
Laer. I will doo't.
looke too't
Yong men wil doo't, if they come too't,
Hor. So Guildensterne and Rosincrance, go too't
Ham. Nay, but swear't
Would step from this, to this? What diuell was't,
Laer. A Norman was't?
Hor. Not when I saw't
Ha. Why, As by lot, God wot: and then you know, It
were Caines Iaw-bone, that did the first murther: It
of Priams slaughter. If it liue in your memory, begin at
Sir, you are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes is at
He whips his Rapier out, and cries a Rat, a Rat,
Had witchcraft in't; he grew into his Seat,
Ham. What?
Clo. Why sir, his hide is so tan'd with his Trade, that
Ham. Ha's this fellow no feeling of his businesse, that
Clown. Is she to bee buried in Christian buriall, that
that I haue seene Play, and heard others praise, and that
Passion, you must acquire and beget a Temperance that
Pol. Oh ho, do you marke that?
Clo. E'ene that
Ham. O reforme it altogether. And let those that
As may dishonour him; take heed of that:
Clo. Cannot you tell that? euery foole can tell that:
Are of a most select and generous cheff in that.
And for my Soule, what can it doe to that?
A Villaine killes my Father, and for that
King. Breake not your sleepes for that,
Laer. How now? what noise is that?
Ophel. Doe you doubt that?
count my selfe a King of infinite space; were it not that
As I perceiued it, I must tell you that
Reynol. I my Lord, I would know that
Pol. Hath there bene such a time, I'de fain know that,
Ham. I must to England, you know that?
Clo. Why there thou say'st. And the more pitty that
anon: 'tis a knauish peece of worke: But what o'that?
Rosin. Beleeue what?
I prythee take thy fingers from my throat;
To pay our selues, what to our selues is debt:
Spurnes enuiously at Strawes, speakes things in doubt,
Ham. Such an Act
Nor any vnproportion'd thoughts his Act:
But howsoeuer thou pursuest this Act,
Is thought-sicke at the act
Ham. And what did you enact?
Did slay this Fortinbras: who by a Seal'd Compact,
Or rather say, the cause of this defect;
The leaperous Distilment; whose effect
That we finde out the cause of this effect,
By Letters coniuring to that effect
'Twere better not assaid; therefore this Proiect
Teares in his eyes, distraction in's Aspect,
Must giue vs pawse. There's the respect
As will not leaue their Tinct
(As I perchance heereafter shall thinke meet
Most necessary 'tis, that we forget
Gen. Good my Lord be quiet
Grating so harshly all his dayes of quiet
And put it in his Pocket
his Maiestie, 'tis the breathing time of day with me; let
bound for England, if your name be Horatio, as I am let
Hamlet.
Hamlet.
Exeunt. Ghost & Hamlet.
Enter Claudius King of Denmarke, Gertrude the Queene, Hamlet,
The Queene Carowses to thy fortune, Hamlet
Machine is to him, Hamlet.
Qu. Hamlet, Hamlet
Ophe. So please you, somthing touching the L[ord]. Hamlet
King. I Hamlet
Enter Ghost and Hamlet.
Gentlemen within. Hamlet, Lord Hamlet
Mar. Lord Hamlet
Oh giue me leaue. How does my good Lord Hamlet?
As to giue words or talke with the Lord Hamlet:
I should be greeted, if not from Lord Hamlet.
Then a command to parley. For Lord Hamlet,
That I will speake to thee. Ile call thee Hamlet,
Exchange forgiuenesse with me, Noble Hamlet;
Laer. It is heere Hamlet.
In your Nature Hamlet,
This gentle and vnforc'd accord of Hamlet
Qu. Oh Hamlet,
King. How fares our Cosin Hamlet?
Ham. What noise? Who cals on Hamlet?
Speake to her Hamlet
King. Thy louing Father Hamlet
Enter Hamlet.
Enter Hamlet.
Enter Hamlet.
Enter Hamlet.
Was't Hamlet wrong'd Laertes? Neuer Hamlet.
King. What Gertrude? How do's Hamlet?
Ghost beckens Hamlet.
Qu. Let not thy Mother lose her Prayers Hamlet:
No more sweet Hamlet
Manet Hamlet.
Manet Hamlet.
Exit Hamlet.
Dar'd to the Combate. In which, our Valiant Hamlet,
Qu. Why how now Hamlet?
But you'l be secret?
Payes homage to vs; thou maist not coldly set
Rosin. She desires to speake with you in her Closset,
Pol. My Lord, he's going to his Mothers Closset:
And with a sodaine vigour it doth posset
eare a hearer: that great Baby you see there, is not yet
And therefore I forbid my teares: but yet
And scape detecting, I will pay the Theft.
As made the things more rich, then perfume left:
Heere's yet some Liquor left
Polon. Marry Sir, heere's my drift,
That with wings as swift
hung those lipps, that I haue kist I know not how oft.
Of Life, of Crowne, and Queene at once dispatcht;
Mar. My Lord vpon the platforme where we watcht
Hold you the watch to Night?
With vs, to watch the minutes of this Night,
Pol. He will come straight:
By Heauen, thy madnesse shall be payed by waight,
That lend a tyrannous, and damned light
Bap. Nor Earth to giue me food, nor Heauen light,
Or if we list to speake; or there be and if there might,
Sport and repose locke from me day and night:
The death I gaue him: so againe, good night.
Fran. Giue you good night
Doom'd for a certaine terme to walke the night;
In the dead wast and middle of the night
'Tis now the verie witching time of night,
Hor. What art thou that vsurp'st this time of night,
mock him not. My good Friends, Ile leaue you til night
Delay it not, Ile haue him hence to night.
Qu. Ah my good Lord, what haue I seene to night?
Let vs impart what we haue seene to night
Mar. What, ha's this thing appear'd againe to night
Assume a Vertue, if you haue it not, refraine to night,
Ham. Neuer make known what you haue seen to night
And whatsoeuer els shall hap to night,
Your Skill shall like a Starre i'th' darkest night,
Goodnight, goodnight.
To the next abstinence. Once more goodnight,
Fra. Barnardo ha's my place: giue you goodnight.
Hor. My Lord, I thinke I saw him yesternight
The time is out of ioynt: Oh cursed spight,
Ham. Why right, you are i'th' right;
Thou liu'st, report me and my causes right
That euer I was borne to set it right.
Other. Who builds stronger then a Mason, a Shipwright,
Or look'd vpon this Loue, with idle sight,
And vanisht from our sight
If you haue hitherto conceald this sight;
Fortin. Where is this sight?
And England, if my loue thou holdst at ought,
Ham. No, no, I neuer gaue you ought
Is sicklied o're, with the pale cast of Thought,
Indeed would make one thinke there would be thought,
But answere made it none: yet once me thought
But in our circumstance and course of thought
With the braue Beast, so farre he past my thought,
Polon. Marry, well bethought:
And you must needs haue heard how I am punisht
haue such a Fellow whipt for o're-doing Termagant: it
outHerod's Herod. Pray you auoid it
Ham. Yours, yours; hee does well to commend it
Reynol. My Lord, I did intend it
Mar. So be it
most powerfully, and potently beleeue; yet I holde it
So by his Father lost: and this (I take it)
Ham. No you'l reueale it
Ophe. My Lord, I doe not know: but truly I do feare it
King. I do not feare it,
For. Let vs hast to heare it,
It fits your wisedome so farre to beleeue it;
Hor. Neuer beleeue it.
Ham. Do not beleeue it
Hor. So haue I heard, and do in part beleeue it.
to come: if it bee not to come, it will bee now: if it
once: how the knaue iowles it to th' grownd, as if it
And draw you into madnesse thinke of it?
Time qualifies the sparke and fire of it:
Lord Horatio, these three yeares I haue taken note of it,
lay him i'th' cold ground: My brother shall knowe of it,
Ham. O throw away the worser part of it,
To let you know of it
And you your selfe shall keepe the key of it
And wil not wrong it
Then your particular demands will touch it,
But doe not goe with it
Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it,
Hor. It beckons you to goe away with it,
it to you trippingly on the Tongue: But if you mouth it,
Ham. How say you then, would heart of man once think it?
Of Hamlets transformation: so I call it,
the Danish; why is this impon'd as you call it?
Rew for you, and heere's some for me. Wee may call it
Hor. Good my Lord tell it
So mortall, I but dipt a knife in it,
and Gauntlets, a Table and Flagons of Wine on it.
He may approue our eyes, and speake to it
Ham. Did you not speake to it?
And am most sensible in greefe for it,
are too deare a halfepeny; were you not sent for? Is it
Ham. Whose was it?
Then Hamlet does it not, Hamlet denies it:
Is not more vgly to the thing that helpes it,
This was sometime a Paradox, but now the time giues it
But that this folly doubts it.
The hearers to Collection; they ayme at it,
you asham'd to shew, hee'l not shame to tell you what it
Hor. Heauen will direct it
Ham. It will not speake: then will I follow it
It waues me forth againe; Ile follow it
Ham. Hast, hast me to know it,
King. We will try it.
Conscience and Grace, to the profoundest Pit.
Gumme: and that they haue a plentifull locke of Wit,
Therefore, since Breuitie is the Soule of Wit,
Could force his soule so to his whole conceit,
carriages, and of very liberall conceit
Which is the Mightier, in his lawlesse fit
their repaire hither, and say you are not fit
We would not vnderstand what was most fit,
And Sister, as the Winds giue Benefit,
If Hamlet giue the first, or second hit,
Osr. A hit, a very palpable hit
Gho. I am thy Fathers Spirit,
The potent poyson quite ore-crowes my spirit,
Thus much the businesse is. We haue heere writ
And I beseech you instantly to visit
Exit
Exit
Exit
Exit
Ophe. Tis in my memory lockt,
Goes slow and stately: By them thrice he walkt,
Oh heate drie vp my Braines, teares seuen times salt,
Ham. Oh that this too too solid Flesh, would melt,
It spill's it selfe, in fearing to be spilt.
Obserue mine Vnkle: If his occulted guilt,
So full of Artlesse iealousie is guilt,
A sauagenes in vnreclaim'd bloud of generall assault
Enter Horatio, with an Attendant.
Laertes, and his Sister Ophelia, Lords Attendant.
Enter King, Queene, Laertes, and a Coffin, with Lords attendant.
Ophe. Will they tell vs what this shew meant?
And they ran well on Horsebacke; but this Gallant
Had he bin Vanquisher, as by the same Cou'nant
And I belieue it is a fetch of warrant:
the Age is growne so picked, that the toe of the Pesant
Against your selfe. I know you are no Truant:
Exeunt. Gent.
Exit Gent.
And here giue vp our selues, in the full bent,
Th' Associates tend, and euery thing at bent
They foole me to the top of my bent.
Pol. Fore God, my Lord, well spoken, with good accent,
Greefe ioyes, Ioy greeues on slender accident.
Ham. I pray thee doe not mock me (fellow Student)
Vp Sword, and know thou a more horrid hent
How in my words someuer she be shent,
Ophe. I hope all will be well. We must bee patient,
A Heart vnfortified, a Minde impatient,
answer, I will doe your Mothers command'ment:
to lament
Where Ioy most Reuels, Greefe doth most lament;
Ham. Sir I lacke Aduancement
Ham. Iudgement
Diuided from her selfe, and her faire Iudgement,
And waites vpon the Iudgement: and what Iudgement
I am sorrie that with better speed and iudgement
Take each mans censure; but reserue thy iudgement:
I stand aloofe, and will no reconcilement,
Was our Sea Fight, and what to this was sement,
fairely outward) should more appeare like entertainment
But doe not dull thy palme, with entertainment
And enterprizes of great pith and moment,
There was for a while, no mony bid for argument,
This Graue shall haue a liuing Monument:
Ham. Why man, they did make loue to this imployment
Contagious blastments are most imminent.
Yet what can it, when one cannot repent?
Haply the Seas and Countries different
your hand thus, but vse all gently; for in the verie Torrent,
To giue them Seales, neuer my Soule consent.
Against the which, a Moity competent
My stronger guilt, defeats my strong intent,
Do I impart towards you. For your intent
To giue it due content
Will be some danger, which to preuent
That is but scratcht withall: Ile touch my point,
Ophe. Indeed la? without an oath Ile make an end ont.
Should haue kept short, restrain'd, and out of haunt,
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Exeunt.
Fixt on the Somnet of the highest Mount.
No reckoning made, but sent to my account
Eyes. When I shall (first asking your Pardon thereunto) recount
Epitaph is, For o, For o, the Hoby-horse is forgot.
Osr. I thanke your Lordship, 'tis very hot
Exeunt. Marching: after the which, a Peale of Ordenance are shot
Cries Cuckold to my Father, brands the Harlot
A Brothers murther. Pray can I not,
Other. Will you ha the truth on't: if this had not
Which Reason and Sanitie could not
Ham. I, or any shew that you'l shew him. Bee not
Laer. Oh, feare me not.
Qu. Ile warrant you, feare me not.
Rosin. No indeed, they are not
I would set downe, and insert in't? Could ye not?
To you in satisfaction. But if not,
Ham. Come, come, and sit you downe, you shall not
Both. My Lord, we will not
Mes. Saylors my Lord they say, I saw them not:
Of all their Conference. If she finde him not,
Marke the encounter: If he loue her not,
Ham. Nay that followes not
Ham. The body is with the King, but the King is not
him; hee drownes not himselfe. Argall, hee that is not
Prouidence in the fall of a sparrow. If it be now, 'tis not
If thou hast nature in thee beare it not;
Try what Repentance can. What can it not?
one that could circumuent God, might it not?
a ones Horse, when he meant to begge it; might it not?
of it. I loued you not
Shall you my Sonne; you haue me, haue you not?
Hor. In what particular thought to work, I know not:
Ham. Nay, I know not
Guild. My Lord, I cannot
Guild. Beleeue me, I cannot
Ham. Sir, I cannot
excellent Voice, in this little Organe, yet cannot
I prythee, when thou see'st that Acte a-foot,
Ham. How long will a man lie i'th' earth ere he rot?
Ghost. I finde thee apt,
Lucian. Thoughts blacke, hands apt,
Kin. 'Tis Hamlets Character, naked and in a Postscript
Qu. More matter, with lesse Art
The Harlots Cheeke beautied with plaist'ring Art
But farewell it: for I will vse no Art.
The Head is not more Natiue to the Heart,
A face without a heart?
seeme to know my stops: you would pluck out the heart
Hora. Now cracke a Noble heart:
In my hearts Core. I, in my Heart of heart,
There's trickes i'th' world, and hems, and beats her heart,
This something setled matter in his heart:
And I am sicke at heart
If thou did'st euer hold me in thy heart,
And shall I couple Hell? Oh fie: hold my heart;
It warmes the very sicknesse in my heart,
I hold it fit that we shake hands, and part:
Such as it is: and for mine owne poore part,
Thy knotty and combined lockes to part,
Or you deny me right: go but apart,
Wee'l teach you to drinke deepe, ere you depart
Pol. My Lord, I will vse them according to their desart
Least with this pitteous action you conuert
of dirt
Ham. It will be short,
To make it truster of your owne report
And gaue you such a Masterly report,
And with a looke so pitious in purport,
When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport
As it is common for the yonger sort
That she should locke her selfe from his Resort,
King. O yet defend me Friends, I am but hurt
To heare of it: They are about the Court,
That you vouchsafe your rest heere in our Court
Ham. O Iephta Iudge of Israel, what a Treasure had'st
Fell into a Sadnesse, then into a Fast,
know him: he hath much Land, and fertile; let a Beast
Ghost. I that incestuous, that adulterate Beast
My Newes shall be the Newes to that great Feast
Ham. Well said old Mole, can'st worke i'th' ground so fast?
Marcellus, the Riuals of my Watch, bid them make hast.
Ham. Bid the Players make hast.
That else leanes on th' Affaire, pray you make hast.
What might be toward, that this sweaty hast
All sawes of Bookes, all formes, all presures past,
That I haue vttered; bring me to the Test
Ham. I shall in all my best
A Couch for Luxury and damned Incest.
sent, and repaire thou to me with as much hast as thou wouldest
May Violets spring. I tell thee (churlish Priest)
And when you are desirous to be blest,
honest
rest of my seruants: for to speake to you like an honest
be a breeder of Sinners? I am my selfe indifferent honest,
Ham. Ha, ha: Are you honest?
Bap. Oh confound the rest:
Ham. 'Tis well, Ile haue thee speake out the rest,
And flights of Angels sing thee to thy rest,
Such Loue, must needs be Treason in my brest:
That cannot be, since I am still possest
Giue me one poore request
of my Mysterie; you would sound mee from my lowest
lyest
Ham. I marry ist;
The Ocean (ouer-peering of his List)
To eares of flesh and bloud; list Hamlet, oh list,
liberall conceited Carriages, that's the French but against
Enter the Ghost.
Exit the Ghost.
Ham. Alas poore Ghost
Enter Ghost.
Enter Ghost.
Exit Ghost.
Laer. And so haue I a Noble Father lost,
Whose motiue in this case should stirre me most
She married. O most wicked speed, to post
None wed the second, but who kill'd the first
worst
In second Husband, let me be accurst,
So to seduce? Won to this shamefull Lust
Seeke for thy Noble Father in the dust;
Discomfort you (my Lord) it nothing must:
Most Lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust,
That I distrust you: yet though I distrust,
a Bakers daughter. Lord, wee know what we are, but
see't. Did these bones cost no more the breeding, but
them to their tryalls: the Bubbles are out
Make you to rauell all this matter out,
Ham. My fate cries out,
When Churchyards yawne, and Hell it selfe breaths out
By indirections finde directions out:
finde it out.
Treacherie, seeke it out
The kettle Drum and Trumpet thus bray out
And a most instant Tetter bak'd about,
oddes: but thou wouldest not thinke how all heere about
doe's he suffer this rude knaue now to knocke him about
Laer. Where is the King, sirs? Stand you all without
The Trumpet to the Cannoneer without,
Ham. I will receiue it with all diligence of spirit; put
Or that the Euerlasting had not fixt
it. Adieu.
thou?
'tis for the dead, not for the quicke, therefore thou
Ile rant as well as thou
For Husband shalt thou-
Ham. Get thee to a Nunnerie. Why would'st thou
Ham. My excellent good friends? How do'st thou
Thus diddest thou
selfe: but indeed, if you finde him not this moneth, you
Mar. O farwel honest Soldier, who hath relieu'd you?
Hor. It would haue much amaz'd you
Moreouer, that we much did long to see you,
Had it th' abilitie of life to thanke you:
Ham. Very well. Follow that Lord, and looke you
So grace and mercy at your most neede helpe you:
To let his madnesse range. Therefore prepare you,
To whom he more adheres. If it will please you
with a difference. There's a Daysie, I would giue you
do you go about to recouer the winde of mee, as if you
Qu. Good Gentlemen, he hath much talk'd of you,
Take my leaue of you
Kin. Hee mad confession of you,
Where you may see the inmost part of you?
Hor. I beseech you
Ham. I do beseech you
Come sir, to draw toward an end with you.
Guild. Good my Lord, vouchsafe me a word with you
Ile change that name with you:
And you are staid for there: my blessing with you;
And he to England shall along with you:
Polon. My Lord; the Queene would speak with you,
And now Laertes, what's the newes with you?
Qu. Alas, how is't with you?
Is strick'd in his Arrest) oh I could tell you.
It is an honest Ghost, that let me tell you:
Pol. My Lord, I haue Newes to tell you
Ham. My Lord, I haue Newes to tell you.
And that in way of caution: I must tell you,
But let me heare from you
King. How is it that the Clouds still hang on you?
Ham. And fixt his eyes vpon you?
Both. Wee'l wait vpon you
to you
What I haue said to you
Polon. What ist Ophelia he hath said to you?
With all my loue I doe commend me to you;
of spirit, hath sent me to you
Kin. Laertes was your Father deare to you?
May doe t' expresse his loue and friending to you,
This maruell to you
you withall; be euen and direct with me, whether you
Ser. Saylors sir, they say they haue Letters for you
I know the good King & Queene haue sent for you
Whereof he is the Head. Then if he sayes he loues you,
for Wise men know well enough, what monsters you
Before my Daughter told me what might you
Ile visit you
You, as your busines and desires shall point you:
Ham. I pray you
Giue her good watch I pray you:
Ham. Arm'd, say you?
Rosin. What say you?
Come: Another hit; what say you?
King. Who shall stay you?
Qu. I shall obey you,
Lost by his Father: with all Bonds of Law
Clo. I marry is't, Crowners Quest Law
Other. But is this law?
Should patch a Wall, t' expell the winters flaw.
Dies not alone; but like a Gulfe doth draw
Winde is Southerly, I know a Hawke from a Handsaw.
Thaw, and resolue it selfe into a Dew:
Herbe-Grace a Sundaies: Oh you must weare your Rew
lest my extent to the Players (which I tell you must shew
I am dead Horatio, wretched Queene adiew,
High on a stage be placed to the view,
Barn. It was about to speake, when the Cocke crew
Finger'd their Packet, and in fine, withdrew
That it went hand in hand, euen with the Vow
Ham. A dreame it selfe is but a shadow
very substance of the Ambitious, is meerely the shadow
light a quality, that it is but a shadowes shadow
hath borne me on his backe a thousand times: And how
But I haue that Within, which passeth show;
Not of the eye, which their Inuestments show:
the most fond and winnowed opinions; and doe but blow
The bold windes speechlesse, and the Orbe below
King. My words flye vp, my thoughts remain below,
A rapsidie of words. Heauens face doth glow,
Of these dilated Articles allow:
She seeing him a-sleepe, leaues him. Anon comes in a Fellow,
Therefore let's follow.
The Queene, the Courtiers. Who is that they follow,
Laer. My Lord, Ile hit him now
Ham. Whats the matter now?
Ham. What hower now?
How to forget that learning: but Sir now,
Ham. If she should breake it now
Videlicet, a Brothell, or so forth. See you now;
Growes wide withall. Perhaps he loues you now,
Laer. Haue at you now.
And loose the name of Action. Soft you now,
White his Shrow'd as the Mountaine Snow
for thy Dowrie. Be thou as chast as Ice, as pure as Snow,
His Beard as white as Snow,
King. Not that I know
And tell you what I know
Polon. I, Springes to catch Woodcocks. I doe know
Mar. Let do't I pray, and I this morning know
But made in craft. 'Twere good you let him know,
(And praise be rashnesse for it) let vs know,
It did me Yeomans seriuce: wilt thou know
Now what my loue is, proofe hath made you know,
See what a grace was seated on his Brow,
Euen heere betweene the chaste vnsmirched brow
And with his other hand thus o're his brow,
Doth by their owne insinuation grow:
Hazard so dangerous as doth hourely grow
And in the Cup an vnion shal he throw
And if thou prate of Mountaines; let them throw
Ham. Or of a Courtier, which could say, Good Morrow
Beares such an Emphasis? whose phrase of Sorrow
Ham. Follow him Friends: wee'l heare a play to morrow.
Or are you like the painting of a sorrow,
in the Index
And it must follow, as the Night the Day,
Till our Scale turnes the beame. Oh Rose of May,
With all his Crimes broad blowne, as fresh as May,
How does your Honor for this many a day?
Doth make the Night ioynt-Labourer with the day:
The Cocke that is the Trumpet to the day,
And do such bitter businesse as the day
From the first Coarse, till he that dyed to day,
No iocond health that Denmarke drinkes to day,
I saw him yesterday, or tother day;
The Cat will Mew, and Dogge will haue his day.
Clo. Of all the dayes i'th' yeare, I came too't that day
The changeling neuer knowne: Now, the next day
That would not let me sleepe; me thought I lay
Play.
Play?
Play.
I haue heard, that guilty Creatures sitting at a Play,
Pol. Giue o're the Play
King. What do you call the Play?
But if you hold it fit after the Play,
Ham. Madam, how like you this Play?
Imperiall Caesar, dead and turn'd to clay,
The pangs of dispriz'd Loue, the Lawes delay,
The Hart vngalled play:
Prepare to play.
For they are actions that a man might play:
Ham. I do not well vnderstand that. Will you play
They play.
And will this Brothers wager frankely play.
Ham. Let the doores be shut vpon him, that he may
Let Hercules himselfe doe what he may,
Ophe. Madam, I wish it may
My soule is full of discord and dismay.
That you haue tane his tenders for true pay,
And still your fingers on your lippes I pray,
Looke you, Ile goe pray
Th' important acting of your dread command? Oh say
He does: what was I about to say?
i'th' Vniuersity, you say?
but to the matter. My Mother you say
Or then or then, with such and such; and as you say,
Clo. Very strangely they say
Art more ingag'd: Helpe Angels, make assay:
Osr. Nothing neither way
King. Giue me some Light. Away
So runnes the world away.
Might stop a hole to keepe the winde away.
Respeaking earthly Thunder. Come away.
King. Oh Gertrude, come away:
And what's vntimely done. Oh come away,
If Hamlet from himselfe be tane away:
With this regard their Currants turne away,
Pol. Away I do beseech you, both away,
Barn. See, it stalkes away
Ham. Why look you there: looke how it steals away:
Ham. Do the Boyes carry it away?
And at the sound it shrunke in hast away,
censure of the which One, must in your allowance o'reway
For bearing of this greeting to old Norway,
Was (as you know) by Fortinbras of Norway,
By and by
Ham. Then will I come to my Mother, by and by:
I will come by and by
That laps't in Time and Passion, lets go by
Polon. Marry Ile teach you; thinke your selfe a Baby,
In the Lobby
shall nose him as you go vp the staires into the Lobby
With turbulent and dangerous Lunacy
To wash it white as Snow? Whereto serues mercy,
Here as before, neuer so helpe you mercy,
Ham. Well, God-a-mercy
Ham. How is it with you Lady?
King. How do ye, pretty Lady?
Calfe there. Be the Players ready?
Marcell. We haue sworne my Lord already
Thou know'st already
Here was a Gentleman of Normandy,
All my smooth Body.
Vnto the voyce and yeelding of that Body,
Ro. What haue you done my Lord with the dead body?
The naturall Gates and Allies of the body;
Go seeke him out, speake faire, and bring the body
And makes each petty Artire in this body,
With which she followed my poore Fathers body
Guil. We both obey,
are they?
them after your own Honor and Dignity. The lesse they
fashion, and so be-ratled the common Stages (so they
Say Voltumand, what from our Brother Norwey?
Ham. Why?
We are arrant Knaues all, beleeue none of vs. Goe thy
O the Recorder. Let me see, to withdraw with you, why
Quillets? his Cases? his Tenures, and his Tricks? why
and not made them well, they imitated Humanity so abhominably
My Honourable Lord, I will most humbly
Ham. I do embrace it freely,
Subscrib'd it, gau't th' impression, plac't it safely,
Ham. How strangely?
Qu. It may be very likely
The Oppressors wrong, the poore mans Contumely,
You doe not vnderstand your selfe so cleerely,
On wholsome life, vsurpe immediately.
Kingdome. To morrow shall I begge leaue to see your Kingly
Ham. What, lookt he frowningly?
wittingly
Worse then the mutines in the Bilboes, rashly,
Though nothing sure, yet much vnhappily
Yes faith, heartily
Ham. I'm sorry they offend you heartily:
Ham. The Mouse-trap: Marry how? Tropically:
Laertes, you but dally,
To haue prou'd most royally:
Out of my Weaknesse, and my Melancholly,
To th' Ambassadors of England giues this warlike volly
a man do, but be merrie. For looke you how cheerefully
For good Polonius death; and we haue done but greenly
King. Why 'tis a louing, and a faire Reply,
Most free in his reply
Which are not starling. Tender your selfe more dearly;
Northerly
is too vnmannerly
With this contagion, that if I gall him slightly,
Hor. Most constantly
Where we shall finde him most conueniently.
and presently
Ile boord him presently.
Bene strooke so to the soule, that presently
Pol. And the Queene too, and that presently
That's not my meaning: but breath his faults so quaintly,
will more willingly part withall, except my life, my
and so I thanke you for your good counsell. Come, my
Pons Chanson will shew you more. For looke where my
Ham. It would cost you a groaning, to take off my
Rosin. My Lord, there was no such stuffe in my
Ham. Mee thinkes it is very soultry, and hot for my
His madnesse is poore Hamlets Enemy.
That you ore-stop not the modestie of Nature; for any
Ham. Ah ha boy, sayest thou so. Art thou there truepenny?
Hey non nony, nony, hey nony:
The violence of other Greefe or Ioy,
Haue we, as 'twere, with a defeated ioy,
Each opposite that blankes the face of ioy,
And there did seeme in him a kinde of ioy
Whereon old Norwey, ouercome with ioy,
For bonny sweet Robin is all my ioy
Their owne ennactors with themselues destroy:
Meet what I would haue well, and it destroy:
As England was his faithfull Tributary,
Qu. How cheerefully on the false Traile they cry,
I ha't: when in your motion you are hot and dry,
And borrowing duls the edge of Husbandry.
And our vaine blowes, malicious Mockery
thou shalt not escape Calumny. Get thee to a Nunnery.
Hangers or so: three of the Carriages infaith are very
for him. Ere we were two dayes old at Sea, a Pyrate of very
Before you visite him you make inquiry
Yea, from the Table of my Memory,
And these few Precepts in thy memory,
That are so fortified against our Story,
Ham. Sir, a whole History
there was no Sallets in the lines, to make the matter sauory;
Polon. At closes in the consequence, I marry,
And who in want a hollow Friend doth try,
Of man and Country
K. Hamlet, this deed of thine, for thine especial safety
the Tragedians of the City
haue a Speech straight. Come giue vs a tast of your quality:
In neither ought, or in extremity:
From me, whose loue was of that dignity,
Passing through Nature, to Eternity
To his vnmastred importunity.
By gis, and by S[aint]. Charity,
To youth and liberty
That they may seeme the taints of liberty;
I should impart a thing to you from his Maiesty
Ham. That if you be honest and faire, your Honesty
something musty.
Ham. How comes it? doe they grow rusty?
As needfull in our Loues, fitting our Duty?
suck't it: thus had he and mine more of the same Beauty
And we did thinke it writ downe in our duty
Volt. In that, and all things, will we shew our duty
Farewell, and let your hast commend your duty
Laer. This is too heauy,
Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy;
Pul'd the poore wretch from her melodious buy,
Did Hamlet so envenom with his Enuy,
